  
A method for automatical ly  precoordinat ing index te rms was devised to 
form combinat ions of te rms  which are  s tored as subject  headings.  A compu-  
ter  p rogram accepts l i s ts  of auto- indexed te rms and by applying l inguist ic 
and sequence rules combines appropr iate te rms ,  thereby effecting improved 
searchabi l i ty  of an information storage and retr ieval  sys tem.  
A ser ious  fal l ing ex ists  in many indexing sys tems in that index te rms 
author ized for use  are  too genera l  for use  by technical ly-knowledgeable 
searchers .  A search  conducted us ing these  te rms frequently produces too 
many documents not speci f ical ly related to the users '  requ i rements .  An 
indexing method using the language in which the document was wr i t ten cor -  
rects  this  fai l ing, but e l iminates the general i ty  of the prev ious  approach. A 
compromise  between indexing general i ty  and specif ic i ty is  offered by NEXUS 
precoord inat ion which combines specif ic  te rms  into sub ject -headings ,  e l imi -  
nating improper  coordination of te rms  when match ing search  requ i rements  
with document te rm sets .  
NEXUS examines  the suffix morpheme of each input te rm and determines  
whether  or not the te rm should be a member  of an index te rm combinat ion 
or  preeoordinat ion.  If insuff ic ient evidence is  p resent  o make  such a 
determination, a sequence rule goes into effect which combines terms based 
on their  syntax. 
A variety of corpora was used to test and develop the NEXUS precoordina- 
tot.  Data bases consisting of legal information, computer program descr ip-  
tions and NASA l inear tape system documentation were used. More variety 
was present  in the NASA documents which made the results of the application 
of NEXUS to this collection more  significant han the others.  Also, a fuller 
battery of rules was developed by this time, increasing the power of the pro -  
gram.  
Summary 
NEXUS is a research project which is concerned with input process ing 
of natural language for information retr ieval.  
The computer  program used to do this task consists of l inguistic rules 
that operate on the suffix portions of printed words, and the order  of these 
words as they appear in a sentence. 
NEXUS accepts l ists of index terms that have resulted from the applica- 
tion of an auto-indexer program to titles and abstracts.  Thcsc term l ists 
are  processed by NICKUS in order  to form combinations of terms which are 
J 
stored as subject headings. Such subject headings or  precoordinations aid 
the searcher  in finding information when they are used in a bibliographic 
printout.  As opposed to coordinate-indexed printouts, consisting of l ists 
of individual te rms and the accession umbers of the source documents, 
those printouts of NEXUS-processed terms contain word combinations that 
have been precoordinated, saving time and increasing accuracy for the 
searcher .  
It must  be s t ressed  that NEXUS operates on general rules. There are  
occur rences  in language that are not covetable by this method. Storage by 
individual terms is effected in conjunction wRh NEXUS so that nothing is 
missed because of rule exceptions. 
Comparison tests have been run using the full NEXUS program,  a part ial  
application of the program using sequence rules (SEQS), and human analysis 
of the same data. Although falling short  of human analysis in some respects  
(except for consistency), the NEXUS approach is more effective than SEQS 
in producing effective combinations. 
Although some suggestions arc made for applying this technique along 
with a possible output format for a bibliographic application, the chief value 
of this effort, however, has been to further study those aspects of language 
that are amenable to computerized analysis for the purpose of improving in- 
put and output functions in information retr ieval.  
SECTION 1 
