. 
This paper presents the most important 
characteristic of the new formalism used in 
Eurotra, the E-Framework. It is a formalism 
for natural language processing within a 
stratificational model. 
In the E-Framework, mapping between levels 
of representation is performed on the basis 
of transitions between trees and partial 
descriptions of objects, called descriptors. 
These descriptors are completed using the 
definition of the target level. 
The tree to descriptor strategy simplifies 
the expression of complex two-way relations 
between text and abstract representations 
when major structural changes have to be 
performed on the input. This is illustrated 
by way of a detailed example showing the 
interaction of the two formal devices of the 
E-Framework, the translator and the 
generator, the basic ideas of which are also 
briefly described. 
The E-Framework has been implemented and 
forms the basis of the development of 
Euretra's pre-industrial prototype of a 
transfer-based, multi-lingual machine trans- 
lation system. 
The E-Framework was developed because of 
problems in expressing this relat ion in a 
simple and perspicuous way in the earl ier 
formal isms used in Eurotra: When gra~m~ars 
grew to have substantial  l inguist ic 
coverage, the rules descr ib ing the mapping 
between levels became highly complex and 
numerous due to interdependence between the 
l inguist ic phenomena tr iggering structural  
changes in a representat ional  tree. 
The pro l i ferat ion in the number of rules was 
main ly  due to the fact that mapping rules 
ident i f ied specif ic  target level rules to 
evaluate the new tree structures, and the 
complexity of rules was due to the tree to 
tree transducing strategy used which 
str ict ly  required speci f icat ion of full ~ 
f ledged target level tree structures. 
Therefore this k ind of mapping strategy was 
abandoned, and a di f ferent one requir ing 
only part ial  target level tree descript ions, 
has been adopted as the basic method for 
performing transit ions within the E- 
Framework. 
i. 