  
The main purpose of communication is to 
exchange informat ion.  Any d iscourse 
understanding model should be able to process 
the flow of information throughout the entire 
text. According to Du Bois (1987)'s studies of 
information flow in discourse across a number 
of languages, information distribution among 
argument positions in clauses is by no means 
random, but cemdn grammatical patterns tend to 
recur consistently. He thus formulated a 
Preferred Argument Structure (PAS) for the 
preferential  structural conf igurat ions of 
arguments. In our examination of Chinese 
narrative discourse, the language also displays 
PAS, yet the Chinese PAS challenges tim 
universality of the one Du Bois proposed. 
Based on the quantity and distribution of lexical 
arguments  and new referents  across 
grammatical roles in discourse, it is realized that 
Chinese PAS also maintains one new argument 
at most within a basic information processiug 
unit. Since new referents in Chinese have to be 
encoded in full NP form, it is thus less likely to 
have more than one lexical argument within a 
clause. Moreover, this single new argument 
appears preferentially in the O role, rather than 
the A and S roles Du Bois's PAS formulates. 
Since the structure of information flow has a 
corresponding rammatical patterning, both 
grammatical and pragmatic processing can be 
carried out s imultaneously,  in that the 
information status of an argument can be 
identified by virtue of grammatical analysis. 
Althougll PAS is neither universal nor 
categorical, it can function in a discourse 
understanding model as heuristic device to 
process the information structure of a connected 
spoken discourse. 
According to Du Bois (1987)'s studies of 
information flow in discourse across a number 
of languages, information distribution among 
argument positions is neither arbitrary nor 
random, but certain grammatical patterns are 
preferred over others, especially they tend to 
recur consistently in a connected spoken 
discourse, hi other words, the structure of 
information f low has a corresponding 
grammatical patterning. Those recurrent 
patterns, which indeed reflect speakers' actual 
language use, are formulated as Preferred 
Argument Structure (PAS) The PAS he 
formulated comprises the following constraints: 
One Lexical Argument Constraint to avoid more 
than one referent in full NP form per clause, 
Non-Lexical A Constraint to have the single 
lexical referent not appearing in the A role, One 
New Argument Constraint o avoid more than 
one referent carrying new information per 
clause, Given A Constraint to have the new 
referent not appeariug in the A role. However, 
in examining Chinese narrative discourse, it is 
discovered that the PAS that this particular type 
of discourse genre displays challenges the 
universality of Du Bois's. The idiosyncrasy of 
the Ctlinese PAS will be discussed in this 
paper. 
in fact, from the computational point of 
view, no matter it is universal or language- 
specific, the existence of PAS has significant 
implication to discourse understanding. On the 
one band, it enables grammatical nd pragmatic 
processing being carried out simultaneously 
because the information status of a referent can 
be identified by virtue of grammatical nalysis; 
on the other hand, PAS can function as heuristic 
device to process the information structure of a 
connected discourse. 
1. 