 Categories of Inquiry Operators 
The inquiries of the grammar can be differentiated 
according to categories of purposes they serve. Five such 
categories are described below. The first two kinds of inquiries 
~ ~ :.'~-ed for control, and the last three extract symbols from the 
environment -- either lexical items or symbols that can be included 
as subject matter in subsequent inquiries. Inquiries of the first two 
kinds have predetermined closed sets of possible responses: the 
last three kinds allow an unlimited number of responses. 
1. in format ion avai lab i l i ty  
2. in format ion character izat ion 
3. decomposition 
4, l ink ing ( ident i f icat ion of related information) 
5. mapping 
Some inquiries determine whether information of a certain 
character is avai lable,  such as the location or duration of an 
event. These inquiries generally precede others used to 
characterize information. 
The operators used for in format ion character izat ion 
form the largest collection of operators among the five kinds. 
They are used to subcategorize and also to discover relations of 
inclusion, identity, precedence, adjacency, and attributes of 
manner, number, completeness, intended emphasis, identifiability 
to the reader, decomposability, gender, hypotheticality, 
extensionality, and many other sorts. 
When the grammar has determined that some of the 
available informaion is decomposable into parts in a syntactically 
significant way (usually through information availability inquiries), 
in format ion decompos i t ion  inquiries are used to obtain access 
168 
to the parts. This is the largest category of inquiries for which an 
unlimited diversity of responses is allowed. These inquiries offer 
access to actors, affected objects, processes, causers, polarities, 
locations, time periods, extents, manners, and various kinds of 
participants or conditioners of processes. 
The linking inquiries are a small collection of inquiries 
which resemble the information decomposition inquiries. They 
obtain information related in a particular way to known 
information, but not part of it. For example, given an event whose 
time must be expressed, there is an inquiry that obtains the 
identity of the time relative to which the event's time of occurrence 
should be expressed. 
In terms of the four forms of information presented in 
section 3.1 above, exploration always proceeds from concepts to 
presentation specifications and term sets, and from term sets to 
terms, as shown in Figure 1. 
Concepts , / - . . . ,  
Presentation Specifications Term Sets 
Terms 
Figure 1: Information flow through mapping inquiries 
A small collection of Mapping inquiries participate in this 
:~,ploration at the points where information forms change. 
Several create specialized presentation specifications for 
concepts, and others create term sets and terms. 
Since operators can request presentation specifications, 
they can in effect demand that the environment work out what 
information to include in a new reference to an entity. The 
e,~vironment must then use the knowledge of past mentions, a 
model of the hearer's attention and of possible confusion 
candidates, and also the knowledge of denotationally appropriate 
le.<ic.~l items; these elements of knowledge are all outside the 
ooundary of the grammar. The mapping from concepts to 
presentation specifications is thus dependent on the particular 
circumstances. 
In a similar way, the mappings from concepts to term sets 
and from term sets to terms also vary depending on the 
comm,mication situation. 
3.3 Categories of Subject Matter 
Recurrent topics and categories of subject matter in the 
inquiries reflect the syntactically encoded categories Of 
knowledge in English. The subject matter categories form two 
groups: 
1. Elements of knowledge that typically exist odor to the 
intention or plan to communicate (described in 
section 3.3.1 below), and 
2. Elements of knowledge ~:r~ated as Dad of pursuing 
the intention or plan to communicate (described in 
section 3.3.2 below.) 
These are called the Knowledge Base and the Text 
Plan, respectively. 
Surprisingly, we do not see any sharing of inquiries 
between these two kinds of knowledge. In Nigel, we find that each 
inquiry operator addresses solely one body of knowledge or the 
other. A few of the categories of operations address both kinds of 
knowledge, notably inquiries about availability of information. 
Within the categories, however, each individual inquiry is 
specialized to a single kind of knowledge. 
3.3.1 Subject  Matter  of Inquiries Concerning Prior 
Knowledge 
In addition to inquiring about availability of information, the 
grammar asks about abstract characteristics of processes, about 
number and discreteness, and about time and space. Also, there 
is ~ substantial collection of inquiries about logical relations such 
as set membership, interval inclusion, identity of two entities, 
extensionality, definiteness of existence, hypotheticality, polarity 
and conditionality. 
3.3.2 Subject Matter of Inquiries for Communicat ion 
Among the inquiry operators that refer to information 
created in pursuit of an intention or plan to communicate, there 
are inquiries about speech acts and about controlling the hearer's 
attention. The latter are used in controlling thematicity, various 
kinds of marking, and the foregrounding or backgrounding of 
information. 
3.4 Support Processes in the Environment 
The organization of inquiry requires that various kinds of 
processes be available in the environment for responding to 
inquiries. At a detailed level, there must be a capability for the 
169 
environment to recognize each inquiry operator and to respond to 
each one appropriately. In computational terms, for a particular 
domain of expressive problems, all of the inquiry operators which 
are called upon to serve that domain must be implemented. (For 
simple expressive problems this can be far fewer than the total for 
the grammar.) 
At a more comprehensive level, we can identify certain 
recurrent activities which must underlie the operations of the 
inquiry operator implementations. These include searching for an 
appropriate set of.lexical items (such as candidate head nouns for 
a nominal group), creating a presentation specification for 
expressing a particular idea, and choosing among a set of terms 
which the grammar has approved as appropriate for a certain use. 
At an even more comprehensive level, the grammar relies 
or; the prior activity of processes which plan the text. 
a, Inquiries in Action: An example 
The following list summarizes Nigel's activity in developing 
a particular nominal group: "her appointment on Wednesday 
morning with us." The starting point is identification of a need to 
refer to an object represented by concept APPOINTMENT. At the 
end of the activity shown, there is a structure containing the word 
"appointment" as the head term, the word "her" as its determiner, 
and elements that could be further developed into the phrases "on 
Wednesday morning" and "with us." The category of each 
inquiry operator is indicated in <brackets>. The order of 
presentation is the order actually used in the program. It is 
somewhat disconnected, since the program often Chooses in an 
arbitrary way between several things which it could do next. An 
inquiry appears more than once if it is used by more than one 
choice expert. 
1. Obtain a presentation specification for 
APPOINTMENT <mapping> 
developing the head term of the group 
2. Obtain a set of candidate head terms <mapping> 
3. Establish that APPOINTMENT is countable 
<characterization> 
4. Classify APPOINTMENT as 
<characterization> 
5. Classify APPOINTMENT as unitary <characterization> 
extensional 
6. Classify APPOINTMENT as not a question variable 
<characterization> 
7. Classify APPOINTMENT as extensional (as part of 
pronoun control) <characterization> 
8. Classify APPOINTMENT as unitary (as part of pronoun 
control) <characterization> 
9. Establish that the gender of APPOINTMENT is known 
<availability> 
10. Establish that in the presentation specification of 
APPOINTMENT, there is more to be expressed than 
gender and number <characterization> 
11. Determine that it is preferab!e to exclude proper 
nouns from the term set, rather than exclude the 
remainder <preference> 
begin developing the determiner 
12. Establish that APPOINTMENT is extensional (for 
determiner control) <characterization> 
13. Establish that APPOINTMENT is identifiable to the 
reader <characterization> 
resume developing the head term 
14. Have the environment select a term, here 
"appointment," from among the terms that survived 
syntactic selectivity <mapping> 
developing the modifiers of the head term 
15. Establish that the presentation specification for 
APPOINTMENT does not indicate that color, location, 
use, substance, size, place of origin or age should be 
expressed (7 inquiries) <characterization> 
developing the accompaniment modifier 
16. Establish that some kind of accompaniment of 
APPOINTMENT should be expressed 
<characterization> 
17. Obtain a symbol (WITHUS) representing the 
accompaniment knowledge to be expressed 
<decomposition> 
complete development of the head term 
18. Determine that the speaker wants the hearer to pay 
more than minimal attention to APPOINTMENT (thus 
cutting off further investigation of a substitution of 
"one" for "appointment") <characterization> 
developing the time period modifier 
19. Establish that the presentation specification of 
APPOINTMENT indicates that a time constraint 
should be expressed <characterization> 
20. Obtain a symbol (ONWEDNESDAYMORN) 
:eprasenting the time constraint to be expressed 
<decomposition> 
resume developing the determiner 
170 
21. Establish that no information about the proximity of 
APPOINTMENT should be expressed 
<characterization> 
22. Establish that information about the possessor of 
APPOINTMENT should be expressed 
<characterization> 
23. Obtain a symbol (JANE) representing the possessor of 
APPOINTMENT <decomposition> 
24. Establish that JANE is unitary <characterization> 
25. Establish that JANE does not represent a question 
variable <characterization> 
26. Obtain a symbol (SELF) representing the speaker 
<decomposition> 
27. Obtain a symbol (PUBLIC) representing the hearer of 
the entire nominal group <decomposition> 
28. Establish that SELF is not identical with or included in 
JANE <characterization> 
29. Establish that PUBLIC is not identical with or included 
in JANE <characterization> 
30. Establish that the gender of JANE is known 
<availability> 
31. Establish that the gender of JANE is female 
<characterization> 
finish developing the modifiers 
32.5stablish that there is no residue of unexpressed 
content in the presentation specification 
<characterization;> 
Using the answers to these inquiries, the grammar builds a 
structure consisting of four elements in an ordered sequence: 
"her," "appointment," ONWEDNESDAYMORN, 
WITHUS. 
the latter two representing conceptual elements tO be further 
developed in subsequent applications of the grammar. 
5 Relations between Operators 
Some operators are closely related in ways not suggested 
above. In particular, some pairs of operators are used together in 
a characteristic way: First an availability operator asks if certain 
information is available, for example, whether the location of an 
event is known. If a positive response is given, a decomposition 
inquiry asks for a symbol to represent the available information, 
such as the location. 
Almost all of the decomposition inquiries are paired with 
availability inquiries in this way. However, a few are not. For 
these, the grammar assumes the existence and separability of the 
information it requests.- The following are the exception cases: 
1. the identity of the speaker. 
2. the identity of the time of speaking, the "now" of 
tense. 
3. given an event to express in an independent clause, 
the identity of the time of occurrence of the event. 
4. given the need to generate a clause, the identity of the 
process portion (which will be realized in the main 
verb.) 
In addition, none of the mapping operators and none of the 
linking operators are paired. We see that the decomposition 
operators have little intellectual content, but the other kinds all 
contribute significantly. 
6 Demands on the Knowledge 
Representation 
Reviewing the inquiries, we can find several kinds of 
operations that are particularly difficult to support in explicit 
knowledge representations uch as those currently used in AI or 
logic. 
One operator asks whether the existence of a particular 
entity is hvoothetical. Knowledge gained from this inquiry is useful 
in controlling contrasts such as the following: 
If they run to town, they will be sorry. 
If they are running to town, they will be sorry. 
Another operator asks about conjectural existence. It 
controls contrasts such as: 
They will run to town. 
They might run to town. 
In the first case the running to town is treated as definite 
but occurring in the future. 
Another asks whether an action to be expressed is habitual 
recurrent rather than a particular instance. Another group of 
inquiries seeks to determine the manner of performance of an 
action. Others deal with partial specifications and "question 
171 
variables" of the sort that are often realized by "wh" terms such 
as "what," "how," and "whether." Some operators control 
negation and quantification, which often cause representation 
problems. 
In addition to all of these potential problem sources, 
associated with inquiries whose responses will be difficult to 
determine, there are also many difficulties which do not arise from 
difficulties of representation. For example, knowing what to 
thematize and what to mark, knowing causes and beneficiaries, 
knowing which of several lexical items to use (after passing all 
syntactic and semantic tests), knowing what relations can be 
expressed as possession, knowing whether the reader is able to 
identify an entity in memory (for definite determination), 
discriminating near from far. all present difficulties without 
appearing to stress the capabilities of modern knowledge 
representations. 
Thus the inquiries can be used as an indication of what 
sorts of expansion a knowledge representation needs and as a 
guide to the ways in which current knowledge of discourse is 
inadequate to support text generation programming. 
7 Factoring the Text Generation Problem 
Inquiry semantics separates the problem of designing a 
text generator into parts which seem much more approachable 
than the problem as a whole. The grammar is separated from the 
environment by a tight interface which does not allow the 
grammar to access any elements of the environment directly. The 
inquiries are defined in a syntactically neutral or pre-syntactic 
form; answering them never requires knowledge of the syntax of 
the language being generated. As a result, the environment and 
the grammar can develop independently. This is particularly 
important today, since the technologies of the environment are 
very unstable, and we would like to be able to use a grammar in 
con!unction with several styles of knowledge representation. 
The environment is divided into the Knowledge Base and 
Text Plan parts, an informal but potentially very useful distinction. 
It tends to facilitate independent development of discourse 
planning methods. Truth-functional issues seem to be related 
largely to the Knowledge Base. 
The treatment of the lexicon separates a variety of lexical 
phenomena in separate, controlled ways: denotational 
appropriateness, syntactic features, and nonsyntactic 
.~onde=~otational attributes such as frequency and register, each 
receive distinctive treatment in NigeL 
8The Abstract Character of Inquiry 
Semantics 
In this section we compare inquiry semantics to other kinds 
of semantics, and also identify the nature of meaning in this 
framework. 
8.1 Comparative Semant ics  
The inquiry-based semantics presented here contrasts 
with other accounts also called "semantics" in many ways, but it 
does not particularly compete with them. This semantics, as a way 
of theorizing, is an answer to the question "How can we 
characterize the circumstances under which it is appropriate to 
make each particular grammatical choice of a language?" 
It differs from other semantic approaches in that 
1. its scope is confined to grammar, rather than 
addressing linguistic behavior as a whole; 
2. it does not presume particular structures (deep or 
otherwise) in the environment; 
3. it is not particularly limited to issues reducible to 
questions of truth value; 
4. its scope includes nondeclarative, noninterrogative 
speech actions (including imperative, imprecation, 
and greeting functions) on a par with declarative and 
interrogative ones; 
5. it includes other functions of language in addition to 
the representational ones (such as the 
attention.direction functions); 
6. it is defined relative to generation rather than 
interpretation, but is not thereby "generative". 
This semantics is potentially compatible with other sorts, 
since it makes very few theoretical assumptions about the nature 
of language and communication. By encompassing every kind of 
syntactic construction, it is more inclusive than most. 
Nothing in inquiry semantics rules out any particular formal 
apparatus as the notation for the methods by which the 
environment responds to inquiries. Accounts of particular 
languages and grammars will give some informal guidance as to 
which sorts of methods will be perspicuous, and may rule out 
particular formalisms as response mechanisms for particular 
grammars. The topic is as yet unexplored. 
172 
8.2 The Nature of Meaning in inquiry Semantics 
We could assign meanings to any of several kinds of 
entities in this framework: grammatical features, collections of 
features, realizations of collections of features (i.e., structures), 
inquiry responses--or other possibilities. Our selection of a 
particular kind of entity as the locus of meaning depends on our 
intended use for that locus. We intend to use this notion of 
meaning to identify the ways in which minimal structurally-justified 
.~istinctives are responsive to their conditions of use. This 
selection does not preclude other selections for other purposes, 
and it certainly does not suggest that there are no other entities 
which are meaningful. 
We associate meanings with qrammal; qa feature~, in part 
because these are the controlling entities in the systemic 
framework. Given a systemic grammar, the syntactic structures 
~',nicn are produced depend entirely on the grammatical features 
which are chosen, and the opportunity to choose a grammatical 
feature also depends entirely on the grammatical features which 
are chosen, i.e., the entry conditions of the system in which "the 
feature occurs. So it is convenient to associate meaning with 
features, and to derive meanings for any other entity by the 
determinate derivational methods which the systemic framework 
provides. 
To state the meaning of a grammatical feature is to state 
the technical circumstances under which the feature is chosen. 
We identify these circumstances as the set of possible collections 
of inquiry responses which are sufficient to lead to the choice of 
the feature. The definitions of the systems of the grammar and 
their choice experts are thus sufficient to determine the meaning 
of every grammatical feature. 45 Ambiguity of a feature arises when 
there is more than one collection of relevant inquiry responses 
which leads to the choice of the feature. 
Differences of meaning reflect differences between 
collections of inquiry responses. In Nigel, for the features Singular 
and Plural, one of the collections of inquiry responses which leads 
4We do not stats the method here, since that involves many systemic details, but 
it is normally a rather straightforward matter for the Nige! grammar? More detail 
can be found in \[Mann 82, Mann & Matthiessen 83a, Mann & Matthiessen 8,3b\]. 
5The meanings of the features are not sufficient to find the sets of meanings 
which corres~ond to particular structures, since that requires the realization 
mapping of featureS to structureS. However, given the associations of features 
with realization operations, the structures for which a particular feature (or 
combination of features) is chosen can be identified, and so in principle the sets of 
techincal circumstances which can yield a particular string can be identified. 
to Singular contains a response "unitary" to MultiplicityQ, and a 
corresponding collection contains "multiple" as a response to 
MultiplicityQ, which leads to Plural. We can determine by 
inspection of the entire meanings that Singular and Plural exclude 
each other, and the determination could be made even if the 
features were not in direct opposition in the grammar. 
Notice that this approach is compatible with approaches to 
grammar other than traditional systemic grammar, provided that 
their optionality is reexpressed as alternation of features, with 
choice experts defined to identify the circumstances under which 
each option is chosen. 
Notice also that it is possible to have meanings in the 
~irammar which are ruled out by the environment, for example, by 
consistency conditions. A change in the environment's 
epistemology could lead to changes in how the grammar is 
employed, without changes in meaning, the grammar being more 
neutral than its user. 
Notice also that the collection of inquiry operators for a 
language is a claim concerning the semantic range of the 
grammar of that language, a characterization of what can be 
exDresssd syntactically. 
Notice finally that, given a grammar and an inquiry 
semantics of each of two different languages, the question of 
whether a particular sentence of one language has the same 
meaning as a particular sentence of the other language is an 
addressable question, and that it is possible in principle to find 
cases for which the meanings are the same. One can also 
investigate the extent to which a particular opposition in one 
language is an exact translation of an opposition in another. 
9 Conclusions 
The inquiry language as a level of abstraction provides a 
useful factoring of the text generation problem, isolating the 
grammar-intensive part. 
Development of inquiry language has led to the creation of 
new kinds of abstract elements that can be the operands of 
i;~quiries. Of these, presentation specifications and term sets have 
sufficiently novel scopes to suggest that they may be useful in 
defining relationships between grammar and language use. 
We have identified three dimensions of characterization 
that yield a convenient abstract structure for understanding 
inqui ry  language collectively (by categories of operands, 
173 
categories of operators and categories of subject matter.) These 
categorizations clarify the ways in which effective use of a 
grammar depends on processes and information outside of the 
grammar, including some ways which are not well controlled in 
available knowledge representations. 
Inquiry semantics contrasts with other theoretical entities 
I .  
also called "semantics" in many ways. It is potentially compatible 
with some other forms, but tends to be broader than many in 
including non-representational functions and non-declarative 
speech actions in its scope. 
Refe rences  
\[Berry 75\] Berry, M., 