ion is carried out over 
the conjoined proposition as a whole, giving a list of 
discourse referents/roles for the discourse processed 
up to a given point. 
Thus for (la, lg): 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lg) Fiona climbed Snowdon. 
we get the representation shown in Figure 5.16 
Now let us consider the processing of discourse se- 
quences containing sentence-final 'then'. Consider 
(la,lb): 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lb) Fiona climbed Snowdon then. 
The system parses (la), followed by (lb) as far as 
'then'. At this point in processing, the representa- 
tion built so far is that of Figure 5. The processing 
temporal discourse referents as phonologically realised, 
as this is not relevant o the analysis of 'then'--but it 
could of course be done. 
16The representation for (la, lg) will also contain in- 
formation about possible discourse relations between the 
two eventualities. We do not describe this feature of the 
system here except where it is relevant o 'then'. 
of 'then' causes the rules for ETR 'then' and par t -  
of  'then' to be invoked in turn. The rule for ETR 
'then' causes the system to "look for" a temporal re- 
ferent indexed 'pr' in the list of discourse referents 
introduced by the processing of the discourse up to 
this point. This list of discourse referents i  threaded 
from one sentence to the next (and from NP to VP 
within a sentence). In fact, what is threaded is not 
just the discourse referents but the overall DRS/type 
from the processing of the discourse up to this point. 
The threading is achieved at discourse level by means 
of the top-level rule of the grammar: 
dis(dis(SBar, Dis)),In, Out) --> 
sbar(SBar,Type .... ,In,Ned), 
dis(Dis,Ned,Out). 
The first argument to the predicate 'dis' is respon- 
sible for building the tree structure associated with 
the parse. The second and third arguments, the Pro- 
log variables 'In' and 'Out', enable threading of dis- 
course referents from the sentence just parsed to the 
remaining discourse. The input 'In' to the proces- 
sing of sbar consists of the overall DRS/type built 
up from processing the discourse up to this point. 
This includes a list of discourse referents generated 
so far. The grammar ules at sbar level and below 
cause the overall DRS/type to be updated to give a 
new type 'Med', which is the input DRS/type to the 
processing of the remainder of the discourse. The 
'Type' argument of sbar is the DRS/type obtained 
from parsing that individual sentence. The other ar- 
guments to sbar are not relevant o this discussion 
and have thus been omitted. 
Thus, at a given point in processing of discourse, 
the system can look for a temporal referent indexed 
'pr'. Looking at Figure 5, we see that an appropriate 
temporal referent indexed 'pr' is present. The rule 
for ETR 'then' therefore succeeds, and a proposition 
is introduced to the effect that T2 is temporally in- 
cluded in T', i.e. 
162 
rl -4 Si, r~ -4 X, r3 "--+ Y, 1"4 ---+ 1~1, r5 -+ T~, r6 -4 S~, r7 -4  U,  rs --+ V, r9 --+ R2, rl0 --). T2, rn --> T'  
climb(X,Y) 
named(X/Emily') 
named(Y/Ben Nevis') 
named(T', ' July') 
s, 1 
occ-time(S,, Tl ) Ta E_ T'  
-v \ ]  
climb(U,V) 
~~ ed(U,'Daniel' ed(V,'Snowdon') 
occ-time(S2, T2) 
Figure 5: Slightly simplified representation for ( la , lg)  and for ( la , lb )  at the point of processing 'then'.  
163 
T2 E T' 
This proposition is added to the restrictions of the 
lower box of Figure 5, to give the completed repre- 
sentation for (la, lb), which is not shown here for 
reasons of space. If there had been no such temporal 
referent marked 'pr' present, the rule for ETR 'then' 
would have failed. 
Now consider the part-of  reading for 'then'. 
We saw earlier that this requires an appro- 
priate discourse relation between the two described 
eventualities---one of ither backgrounding or ela- 
boration. Testing for whether an elaboration re- 
lation is possible requires world knowledge, and we 
have not attempted to build any of this into the sy- 
stem, although there appears to be no reason why 
this could not be done. The system in its present 
form therefore checks only for the background in- 
stance of the part -of  relation. 
Backgrounding is possible if the second eventua- 
lity is either a state or if it is presented with pro- 
gressive viewpoint. This means that, in order to 
test for backgrounding, the representations for indi- 
vidual sentences must contain information about the 
aspectual properties of the described eventualities-- 
for example, whether an eventuality is a state or a 
non-state (event), and whether it is presented with 
simple aspect (external viewpoint) or progressive as- 
pect (internal viewpoint). It is widely known that 
the aspectual properties of a described eventuality 
depend on certain properties of the verb 17 and also 
on other elements such as the referents of NP argu- 
ments. For example, the event described by: 
(5) Daniel climbed a mountain. 
is a Vendler accomplishment. Alternatively, we may 
characterise it in Krifka's terms as having the pro- 
perty +Q (quantized) or -CUM (non-cumulative), 
which are equivalent to the lack of a natural end- 
point or culmination. However, the event described 
by: 
(6) Daniel climbed mountains. 
is a Vendler activity, and in Krifka's terms has the 
property -Q/+CUM. Here we see what Krifka de- 
scribes as a "mapping" from the properties of the NP 
object is to the properties of the event. The referent 
of 'a mountain' is+Q, and so is the event of (5). The 
referent of 'mountains' is -Q,  and so is the event of 
(6). Such mapping from the properties of the object 
to the properties of the event only occurs for certain 
verbs, however--those where what Krifka calls the 
17E.g. 'basic aspectual type' in Moens' terms (Moens, 
1987) and semantic features in both Verkuyl's (1989) and 
Krifka's (1991) accounts. 
lSMore strictly the "patient", as it is thematic roles 
and not grammatical roles that are important here. 
"thematic relation" between the object and the event 
has an appropriate property. One such property that 
enables this mapping is what he calls gradual  pati- 
ent. In such cases, there is an intuitive relationship 
between the "progress" of the object and the pro- 
gress of the event. For example, in an eating event, 
the object is gradually consumed, and in a writing 
event, the object is gradually created. Both 'eat' and 
'write', as well as 'climb' thus have thematic relati- 
ons with the property gradual  pat ient.  Driving 
events do not, on the other hand, exhibit his corre- 
spondence between the progress of the event and the 
progress of the object. Thus the thematic relation 
between object and event for 'drive' does not have 
the gradual  pat ient  property, which explains why: 
(7) John drove the car. 
is +CUM/-Q even though 'the car' is -CUM/+Q. 19 
In our EKN account we encode Krifka's properties 
of thematic relations as types of situations and in- 
dividuals. For example, the lexical entry for 'climb' 
includes the following information: 
Z 
S,Y \] 
climb(X,Y) GRAD-PAT 
The grammar rules then make reference to this in- 
formation. For example, the rule: 
vbar( . . . .  ) --> v( . . . .  ), np( . . . .  ) 
contains a procedure which evaluates the Q-value of 
the predicate (vbar) according to the following algo- 
rithm: 
If: The thematic relation between S and Y is of type 
GRAD-PAT 
Then: Set the Q-value of the predicate (vbar) to be 
the same as that of Y 
Otherwise: Set the Q-value of the predicate to -Q.  
The Q-value of the agent 2? also affects that of the 
described eventuality. For example, the eventuality 
described by: 
(8) Emily climbed the mountain. 
is +Q, whereas that described by: 
(9) People climbed the mountain. 
is -Q. In (9), the -Q  value of the agent is transferred 
to the event. In order to deal with such examples, 
the rule 
s ( . . . )  --> r ip(. . . ) ,  vp( . . . )  
19A well-known test for the property +CUM/-Q of 
predicates i the ability to combine with a for-adverbial. 
2?Corresponding to the grammatical subject in these 
active sentences. 
164 
rl --~S, r~ -~X, r3 -~R 
named(X,'Fiona ) 
gi~l(x) 
l s l  
I STATE 
Figure 6: Representation for (le) at the point of pro- 
cessing 'then'. 
contains a similar algorithm to the one in the vbar 
rule. 
Thus the representation constructed by parsing a 
sentence includes information about the aspectual 
properties of the described eventuality. These in- 
clude the features +/ -STATE and +/ -Q  as already 
described, together with +/ -PROG depending on 
whether or not progressive aspect is present, and 
+/ -PUNCT which distinguishes punctual and non- 
punctual events (corresponding to the difference bet- 
ween achievements and accomplishments). 
Let us now consider the representation from the 
processing of: 
(le) Fiona was a girl then. 
up to the point where 'then' is reached. This is given 
(in slightly simplified form) in Figure 6. 
Now suppose we are processing (lc,le): 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
(le) Fiona was a girl then. 
The rule for par t -o f  'then' requires that the se- 
cond eventuality is either a state or it is described 
with progressive viewpoint. The former is true in 
this case, so the conditions for par t -o f  'then' are 
satisfied. The representation btained for (lc,le) is 
shown in Figure 7. 
The semant ics of  ~part-of '  
What exactly does it mean for the par t -o f  (~) re- 
lation to hold between two eventualities? The idea 
is that if $2 ~ $1, then any infon which is suppor- 
ted by $2 is also supported by $1. In other words, 
$2 adds further information to S1, causing it to be 
more fully specified. Here we exploit the partiality 
of situation theory. Situations may be only parti- 
ally specified: if we say that $1 supports ~, this does 
not tell us anything about what other information 
S1 does or does not support. It is thus possible for 
a later utterance to add further information about 
$1 and thereby specify it more fully. If the first ut- 
terance tells us that $1 supports the infon ~r, and the 
second tells us that $2 supports the infon 7" and also 
that $2 <1 $1, then we know that $1 supports both 
a and v. This is straightforward enough for the ela- 
boration case. We need to consider carefully what it 
means in a backgrounding case such as (la,le). 
According to our theoretical analysis, if an even- 
tuality is backgrounded then it does not introduce 
an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, the backgro- 
unded eventuality is of the same duration as that of 
the preceding event-- it "takes on" the time of that 
event. 21 Thus, in the representation f (lc,le) in Fi- 
gure 7, the backgrounded $2 has the same temporal 
extent as the event $1. This amounts to claiming 
that (le) describes only the part of the state that 
coincides with the preceding event. Of course we 
know that the state of Fiona's being a girl began 
before and continues after Emily's cl imb--there is a 
relationship of temporal inclusion between the "to- 
tal duration" of the state and the event. But we are 
saying that those parts of the state that are before 
and after the event are not described but are infer- 
red from our world knowledge about the duration of 
such states. 
Stative verbs are "natural backgrounders" in that 
they describe ventualities without making reference 
to the beginning and end points of the eventuality. 
They naturally describe a situation which can rea- 
dily be seen as a temporal "slice" of a more prolon- 
ged situation. For this reason, in the lexical entries 
for stative verbs in our grammar, there is no men- 
tion of the occurrence-time of the state. Progressives 
usually behave in a similar way. When an event de- 
scribed with progressive viewpoint follows one with 
simple (perfective) viewpoint, the relation between 
them is normally one of backgrounding. The effect of 
progressive viewpoint is to present he event from an 
internal perspective. An event described with inter- 
nal perspective is no longer temporally bounded-- it  
does not have an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, 
its duration is that of the preceding event, just as in 
the stative case. 
If we define two instances of the par t -o f  relation: 
. <1 bg for the backgrounding case 
* _ el for the elaboration case 
we can thus say: 
S2 ~ b s $1 ) T2 = Tz 
where T1,T2 are the temporal durations of $I and 
$2 respectively. And: 
S~ <l el $1 -'--+ T2 ___ T1 
Thus, for the general <l relation: 
$2 <I $1 ) T2 C T1 
21Evidence for this comes from an analysis of 'at the 
time' and 'at the same time'. See (Glasbey, ms2) for 
details. 
165 
r~ --+ $1, r2 ~ X, r3 --+ Y, r4 -~ R1, rs -> TI, r6 --~ $2, r7 --~ U, rs --~ R~ 
climb(X,V) 
IR, I 
I named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
Sl l  
occ-time(S1, T,) 
 rl(U) 
R2 I 
named(U,'Fiona') 
s2 I 
STATE $2 _<3 Sl 
Figure 7: Representation for (lc,le). 
Finally, let us consider (la,lf):  
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lf) Fiona was climbing Snowdon then. 
In this case, an ETR is present and the second sen- 
tence has progressive aspect. This means that the 
conditions for both ETI~ 'then' and par t -o f  'then' 
are met.Our grammar will thus cause two represen- 
tations to be generated for (la, lf), corresponding to 
the two readings that we identified in Section 1. 
3 Genera l  remarks  
3.1 Fur ther  Deve lopments  
The system parses sequences of any length, keeping 
track of all the discourse referents/roles introduced 
so far. Thus, as it stands at present, it will find a 
temporal referent for 'then', irrespective of how far 
back in the discourse that referent was introduced. 
It may be desirable to refine this in some way--for 
example, to disallow anaphoric reference to an ETR 
that is more than a certain "distance" back in the 
discourse. Also, the system at present finds only 
the most recently introduce temporal referent. This 
could easily be modified--for example, in order to 
allow it to produce a set of alternatives. However, it 
appears that we would need to take discourse struc- 
ture into account here. 
3.2 Relat ion to other accounts of  temporal  
reference 
It is important to consider how our analysis fits with 
other work on temporal reference in discourse, and 
how readily our treatment of 'then' could be incorpo- 
rated into these accounts. Kamp and Reyle (forth- 
coming) present a DRT fragment which deals with 
temporal reference but does not include 'then'. In 
(Glasbey, forthcoming) and (Glasbey, 1992) we pre- 
sent a modification of Kamp and Reyle's fragment 
which incorporates our analysis of 'then'. We make 
the necessary distinction between what we call "ex- 
plicit" and "inferred" times by allowing a temporal 
referent o be introduced only when an explicit tem- 
poral referent is present. If there is no ETR, only an 
event referent may be introduced. This enables us to 
produce the correct readings for 'then'. We consider 
the ST/DRT account given in the present paper to 
be preferable, however, in that situation theory al- 
lows us to express information about the utterance 
in a way that traditional DRT does not. This enables 
us to make precisely the distinction we need between 
whether or not a particular eferent was phonologi- 
cally realised in the utterance. 
Lascarides and Asher (1991) present an account of 
temporal reference where discourse relations between 
eventualities are deduced by means of defeasible rea- 
soning. Their account is expressed in a version of 
166 
DRT and preliminary investigations suggest hat it 
could be extended to include 'then' in a similar way 
to the Kamp and Reyle fragment. 
4 Conc lus ion  
We have developed a computational gramlnar which 
parses discourse consisting of sequences of simple 
sentences containing a range of tense and aspect con- 
structions. In particular, it generates the required 
readings for sentence-final 'then'. We have also in- 
dicated how our analysis of 'then' could be incorpo- 
rated into some existing DRT accounts of temporal 
reference. The system appears to be capable of va- 
rious refinements involving more detailed theories of 
discourse structure, and as such may provide a basis 
for development of more extensive systems for dis- 
course analysis. 
Acknowledgments  
I would like to thank Robin Cooper, Max Cresswell, 
Elisabet Engdahl, Martin Mellor and Marc Moens 
for helpful advice and comments on this work. 
Re ferences  
\[Bach, 1986\] Emmon Bach. The algebra of events. 
Linguistics and Philosophy, 9:5-16, 1986. 
\[Barwise, 1989\] Jon Barwise. The Situation in Logic. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1989. 
\[Barwise and Cooper, forthcoming\] Jon Barwise 
and Robin Cooper. Extended Kamp Notation: 
a graphical notation for situation theory. In P. 
Aczel, D. Israel, Y. Katagiri and S. Peters (eds.) 
Situation Theory and its Applications, Vol. 3. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1993. 
\[Cooper, 1991\] Robin Cooper. Three lectures on si- 
tuation theoretic grammar. In Natural Language 
Processing. Proceedings of2nd Advanced School 
in Artificial Intelligence, Guarda, Portugal, Oc- 
tober 8-12, 1990. In series: Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence, Miguel Filgueiras (ed.). 
Springer Verlag, Berlin, London, 1991. 
\[Cooper, forthcoming\] Robin Cooper. Generalized 
quantifiers and resource situations. In P. Ac- 
zel, D. Israel, Y. Katagiri and S. Peters (eds.) 
Situation Theory and its Applications, Vol. 3. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1993. 
\[Cooper, msl\] Robin Cooper. 