 
We present he dialogue component of 
the speech-to-speech translation system 
VERBMOBIL. In contrast to conventional 
dialogue systems it mediates the dia- 
logue while processing maximally 50% of 
the dialogue in depth. Special require- 
ments (robustness and efficiency) lead 
to a 3-layered hybrid architecture for 
the dialogue module, using statistics, an 
automaton and a planner. A dialogue 
memory is constructed incrementally. 
1 Introduct ion 
VERBMOBIL combines the two key technologies 
speech processing and machine translation. The 
long-term goal of this project is the development 
of a prototype for the translation of spoken di- 
alogues between two persons who want to find a 
date for a business meeting (for more detail on the 
objectives of VERBMOBIL see (Wahlster, 1993)). A 
special characteristic of VERBMOBIL is that both 
participants are assumed to have at least a pas- 
sive knowledge of English which is used as inter- 
mediate language. Translations are produced on 
demand so that only parts of the dialogue are pro- 
cessed. If VERBMOBIL is inactive, shallow process- 
ing by a keyword spotter takes place which allows 
the system to follow the dialogue at least partially. 
In this paper focus is on the description of the 
dialogue component, which processes the interac- 
tion of the two dialogue partners and builds a rep- 
resentation of the discourse. Dialogue processing 
in VERBMOBIL differs from systems,like SUNDIAL 
(Andry, 1992) in two important points: (1) VERB- 
MOBIL mediates the dialogue between two human 
dialogue participants; the system is not a partic- 
ipant of its own, i.e. it does not control the di- 
alogue as it happens in the flight scheduling sce- 
nario of SUNDIAL; (2) VERBMOBIL processes maxi- 
mally 50% of the dialogue contributions in depth, 
*The research within VERBMOBIL presented here is 
funded by the German Ministry of Research and Tech- 
nology under grant 011V101K/1. 
i.e. when the 'owner' of VERBMOBIL speaks Ger- 
man only. The rest of the dialogue can only be 
followed by a keyword spotter. 
In the remainder of this paper first the require- 
ments of the VERBMOBIL setting with respect o 
functionality and design of the dialogue compo- 
nent section are introduced. Then a hybrid archi- 
tecture for the dialogue component and its embed- 
ding into the VERBMOBIL prototype are discussed. 
Finally, results from our implemented system are 
presented. We conclude with an outline of future 
extensions. 
2 Tasks of the Dialogue 
Component  
The dialogue component within VERBMOBIL has 
four mQor tasks: 
(1) to support speech recognition and linguis- 
tic analysis when processing the speech signal. 
Top-down predictions can be made to restrict he 
search space of other analysis components o get 
better esults in shorter time (Young et al, 1989; 
Andry, 1992)). For instance, predictions about a 
speech act can be used to narrow down the set of 
words which are likely to occur in the following 
utterance - a fact exploited by the speech recog- 
nition component which uses adaptive language 
models (Jellinek, 1990). Top-down predictions are 
also used to limit the set of applicable grammar 
rules to a specific subgrammar. They are of par- 
ticular importance since the system has to work 
under real-time constraints. 
(2) to provide contextual information for other 
VERBMOBIL components. In order to get good 
translations, context plays an important role. One 
example is the translation of the German "Geht es 
bei Ihnen?" which can be translated as "Does it 
suit you?" or "How about your place?", depend- 
ing on whether the dialogue partners discussed a
time or a place before. A discourse history is con- 
structed which can be accessed by other VP.RB- 
MOBIL components(Ripplinger and Caroli, 1994; 
LuperFoy and Rich, 1992). 
(3) to follow the dialogue when V~.RBMOBIL is 
off-line. When both dialogue participants speak 
188 
English (and no automatic translation is neces- 
sary) VERBMOBIL is "passive", i.e. no syntactic or 
semantic analyses are performed. In such cases, 
the dialogue component tries to follow the dia- 
logue by using a keyword spotter. This device 
scans the input for a small set of predetermined 
words which are characteristic for certain stages of 
the dialogue. The dialogue component computes 
the most probable speech act type of the next ut- 
terance in order to selects its typical key words. 
(4) to control clarification dialogues between 
VERBMOBIL and its users. If processing breaks 
down VERBMOBIL has to initiate a clarification di- 
alogue in order to recover. 
3 The Architecture 
Planner 
I 
FSM 
'1 
Statistics 
Dialogue Memory Intel~~ 
Refer~mtlal StnJcture 
. Key-Word Spotting I 
? -~ SemanUc \] 
Evaluation \] 
IH,.?.,. i 
~ Generation I
Figure 1: Architecture of the dialogue module 
The abovementioned requirements cannot be 
met when using a single method of processing: if 
we use structural knowledge sources like plans or 
dialogue-grammars, top-down predictions are dif- 
ficult make, because usually one can infer many 
possible follow-up speech acts from such knowl- 
edge sources that are not scored (Nagata nd Mo- 
rimoto, 1993). Also, a planning-only approach is 
inappropriate when the dialogue is processed only 
partially. Therefore we chose a hybrid 3-layered 
approach (see fig. 1) where the layers differ with 
respect o the type of knowledge they use and the 
task they are responsible for. The components are 
A Statist ic Module The task of the statistic 
module is the prediction of the following 
speech act, using knowledge about speech act 
frequencies in our training corpus. 
A Finite State Machine (FSM) The 
finite state machine describes the sequence of 
speech acts that are admissible in a standard 
appointment scheduling dialogue and checks 
the ongoing dialogue whether it follows these 
expectations ( ee fig. 2). 
A P lanner  The hierarchical planner constructs 
a description of the dialogue's underlying dia- 
logue and thematic structures, making exten- 
sive use of contextual knowledge. This mod- 
ule is sensitive to inconsistencies and there- 
fore robustness and backup-strategies arethe 
most important features of this component. 
While the statistical component completely re- 
lies on numerical information and is able to pro- 
vide scored predictions in a fast and efficient way, 
the planner handles time-intensive tasks exploit- 
ing various knowledge sources, in particular lin- 
guistic information. The FSM can be located in 
between these two components: it works like an 
efficient parser for the detection of inconsistent di- 
alogue states. The three modules interact in cases 
of repair, e.g. when the planner needs statistical 
information to resume an incongruent dialogue. 
On the input side the dialogue component is in- 
terfaced with the output from the semantic con- 
struction/evaluation module, which is a Drts-like 
feature-value structure (Bos et al, 1994) contain- 
ing syntactic, semantic, and occasionally prag- 
matic information. The input also includes infor- 
mation from the generation component about the 
utterance produced in the target language and a 
word lattice from the keyword spotter. 
The output of the dialogue module is de- 
livered to any module that needs information 
about the-dialogue pursued so far, as for example 
the transfer module and the semantic onstruc- 
tion/evaluation module. Additionally, the key- 
word spotter is provided with words expected in 
the next utterance. 
4 Layered Dialogue Processing 
4.1 Knowledge-Based Layers 
4.1.1 The Underly ing Knowledge Source 
- The Dialogue Model 
Like previous approaches for modeling task- 
oriented dialogues we base our ideas on the as- 
sumption that a dialogue can be described by 
means of a limited but open set of speech acts 
(e.g. (Bilange, 1991), (Mast, 1993)). As point 
of departure we take speech acts as proposed by 
(Austin, 1962) and (Searle, 1969) and also a num- 
ber of so-called illocutionary acts as employed in a 
model of information-seeking dialogues (Sitter and 
Stein, 1992). We examined the VERBMOBIL cor- 
pus of appointment, scheduling dialogues for their 
occurrence and for the necessity to introduce new 
speech acts 1 . 
At present,, our model contains 17 speech acts 
(see (Maier, 1994) for more details on the char- 
acterization of the various speech acts; the di- 
alogue model describing admissible sequences of 
z The acts we introduce below are mostly of illocu- 
tionary nature. Nevertheless we will refer to them as  
speech acts throughout this paper. 
189 
speech acts is given in fig. 2). Among the domain- 
dependent speech acts there are low-level (primi- 
tive) speech acts like BEC~RUESSUNG for initiating 
and VERABSCHIEDUNG for concluding a dialogue. 
Among the domain-independent speech acts we 
use acts as e.g. AKZEPTANZ and ABLEHNUNG. 
Additionally, we introduced two speech acts nec- 
essary for modeling our appointment scheduling 
dialogues: INIT_TERMINABSPRACHE and BESTAE- 
TIGUNG. While the first is used to describe utter- 
ances which state date s or places to be negotiated, 
the latter corresponds to contributions that con- 
tain a mutual agreement concerning a given topic. 
Mnin dialogue 
Begruessung Auflordecung_Stellung 
BecufL_Position Init _Telminal~prache Vorsehlag 
~Vorsldlung 
rund .TA ~ Vomchlag 
Aufforderung_Stellung ~ 
? ~ $  
Inlt_Temamabsprache~ ~ Akzeplanz, Ablehnung/ 
Auforderung Vorschlag / , ,~  U at~k NV?mchlag / /  / /  uestaetigung \ / /  
w forderung_- ~0 ! Stellung 
Bestaetigung Dank Vomchlag. Aufforderung_Stellung Verabsehiedung 
\[ r'\] lnilial State 0 Fu,al Sta. ? Non-finalS== \] 
Potential sdditions English Equivalents for German Speech Act Names: 
in any diMogue state Begruessung Greeting 
Berufi_Position Position 
Vorstellung 