  
This paper presents a study of military applications of 
advanced speech processing technology which includes 
three major elements: (1) review and assessment of cur- 
rent efforts in military applications of speech technol- 
ogy; (2) identification of opportunities for future mili- 
tary applications of advanced speech technology; and (3) 
identification of problem areas where research in speech 
processing is needed to meet application requirements, 
and of current research thrusts which appear promising. 
The relationship of this study to previous assessments of 
military applications of speech technology is discussed, 
and substantial recent progress is noted. Current efforts 
in military applications of speech technology which are 
highlighted include: (1) narrowband (2400 b/s) and very 
low-rate (50-1200 b/s) secure voice communication; (2) 
voice/data integration in computer networks; (3) speech 
recognition in fighter aircraft, military helicopters, bat- 
tle management, and air traffic control training systems; 
and (4) noise and interference r moval for human listen- 
ers. Opportunities for advanced applications are identi- 
fied by means of descriptions of several generic systems 
which would be possible with advances in speech tech- 
nology and in system integration. These generic systems 
include: (1) integrated multi-rate voice/data commu- 
nications terminal; (2) interactive speech enhancement 
system; (3) voice-controlled pilot's associate system; (4) 
advanced air traffic control training systems; (5) battle 
management command and control support system with 
spoken natural language interface; and (6) spoken lan- 
guage translation system. In identifying problem areas 
and research efforts to meet application requirements, 
it is observed that some of the most promising research 
involves the integration of speech algorithm techniques 
including speech coding, speech recognition, and speaker 
recognition. 
1 Int roduct ion  and Summary  
This paper is the result of a study of military appli- 
cations of advanced speech processing technology which 
has been undertaken with the following goals: (1) to 
*This work was sponsored by the Department of the Air Force 
and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. 
review and assess a representative sampling of current 
efforts in military applications of advanced speech pro- 
cessing technology; (2) to identify opportunities for new 
military applications, or further development of current 
applications; and (3) to identify areas where improve- 
ments to speech processing technology are needed to 
address military problems. The intention is to outline 
a fairly broad range of applications, opportunities and 
speech technology areas; however, the coverage is not 
intended to be fully comprehensive, nor to be very de- 
tailed in any particular area. Numerous references are 
provided, on other survey articles, on specific applica- 
tions and technologies, and on pertinent research efforts. 
An historical point of reference for this paper is the 
1977 paper by Beek, Neuburg, and Hodge \[10\], which 
assessed speech recognition and speech processing tech- 
nology for military applications. A great deal has been 
accomplished since 1977 both in speech technology and 
in applications, but the generic application areas iden- 
tified in that earlier paper generally remain as relevant 
now as they were in 1977. 
The organization of this paper is as follows. A 
framework for the paper is first developed by outlining 
key speech technology areas and key categories of mili- 
tary applications, and identifying which technologies are 
needed for each category of application. Several previ- 
ous assessments of military applications of speech tech- 
nology are then reviewed, and the relationship of this 
study to those assessments is discussed. A representative 
sampling of current work in the key military application 
areas is then summarized and assessed. A set of oppor- 
tunities for advanced applications are then identified and 
described; the approach is to describe several generic sys- 
tems which would be possible with advances in speech 
technology and in system integration. This description 
Of application opportunities i  followed by a brief outline 
of areas where improvements are needed in speech tech- 
nology to meet the challenges of military applications, 
and notes several major technology development efforts 
which are in progress. Finally, conclusions and areas for 
further study are discussed. 
433 
2 Framework of Speech Tech- 
nologies and Military Applica- 
tion Areas 
An outline of speech technology areas which are of im- 
portance for military (and non-military) applications i
presented in Table 1. All these areas are subjects for on- 
going research and development. Summaries of the tech- 
nology are presented in a variety of textbooks and sum- 
mary papers, and ongoing developments are presented 
at the annual ICASSP conferences and in other forums. 
Although the terms used in Table 1 are generally well 
known, they will be defined, as needed, later in this pa- 
per in the context of discussions of particular applica- 
tions. 
Table 1: Speech Technology Areas for Mi l i tary 
Applications 
1. Speech Recognition 
1.1 Isolated Word Recognition (IWR) 
1.2 Continuous Speech Recognition (CSR) 
1.3 Key-Word Recognition (KWR) 
1.4 Speech Understanding (SU) 
2. Speaker Recognition 
2.1 Speaker Verification (SV) 
2.2 Speaker Identification (SI) 
2.3 Language Identification (LI) 
ing communication between people and computers. In 
the latter area, speech recognition and synthesis gener- 
ally would serve as a part of a larger system designed to 
provide a natural user interface between a person and a 
computer. Tables 1 and 2 together serve as a framework 
for the remainder of this paper. 
Table 2: Military Speech Application Areas 
1. Speech Communications (Speech Coding, Speech 
Enhancement) 
1.1 Secure Communications 
1.2 Bandwidth Reduction 
2. Speech Recognition Systems for Command and 
Control (C 2) (IWR, CSR, KWR, SU, Synthesis) 
2.1 Avionics 
2.2 Battle Management 
2.3 Resource and Data Base Management 
2.4 Interface to Computer and Communication 
Systems 
3. Speech Recognition Systems for Training (IWR, 
CSR, SU, Synthesis) 
4. Processing of Degraded Speech (Enhancement) 
5. Security Access Control (SV) 
3. Speech Coding and Digitization 
3.1 Waveform Coding 
3.2 Source Coding Using Analysis/Synthesis 
3.3 Vector Quantization (VQ) 
3.4 Multiplexing 
4. Speech Enhancement 
4.1 Noise Reduction 
4.2 Interference Reduction 
4.3 Speech Transformations (Rate and Pitch) 
4.4 Distortion Compensation 
5. Speech Synthesis 
5.1 Synthesis from Coded Speech 
5.2 Synthesis from Text 
Table 2 outlines a number of key military speech appli- 
cation areas which will be addressed in more detail in this 
paper, and identifies the speech technology areas which 
are utilized for each application area. The areas in Ta- 
ble 2 generally divide into applications involving speech 
communication between people, and applications involv- 
3 Relationship to Previous As- 
sessments of Military Applica- 
tions of Speech Technology 
3.1 Beek ,  Neuburg ,  and  Hodge (197"7) 
This paper \[10\] provided a comprehensive r view of the 
state-of-the-art of speech technology and military appli- 
cations as of 1977. It serves as a useful reference point for 
the present paper. The authors grouped potential mil- 
itary applications into four major categories: (1) secu- 
rity (including access control and surveillance); (2) com- 
mand and control; (3) data transmission and communi- 
cation; and (4) processing distorted speech. Other than 
the training application (which was mentioned briefly in 
the Beek, et al, paper), these categories cover all the 
application areas listed in Table 2. 
Most of the applications cited in the 1977 review were 
in the research and development stage, and a daunt- 
ing list of unsolved problems was cited. Much progress 
has been made since 1977 in speech technology (both 
algorithms, and hardware implementations of these al- 
gorithms) and in applications. The following areas of 
progress are worthy of particular note: 
1. Digital Narrowband Communicat ion Sys- 
434 
terns - -  The Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) al- 
gorithm was relatively new in 1977. Improvements 
in technology and the coding algorithm have now 
led to widespread eployment of digital narrowband 
secure voice, especially by means of the STU-III 
(secure terminal unit) family of equipment at 2.4 
kb/s. In addition, significant progress has been 
made in developing practical coders for lower rates 
using Vector Quantization (i.e., pattern matching) 
techniques. 
2. Automat ic  Speech Recognit ion - -  Major ad- 
vances both in CSR and IWR have been made 
largely through the widescale development of 
statistically-based Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
techniques, as well as through the development and 
application of dynamic time warping (DTW) recog- 
nition techniques. ItMM techniques which were pio- 
neered prior to 1977, have in recent years been fur- 
ther developed at a large number of laboratories, 
with significant advances both in recognition per- 
formance and in efficiency of implementation. A
sampling of basic references on DTW and tIMM is 
provided by \[6,21,59,60,113\]. \[94\] provides a good 
overview of speech recognition technology, and has 
many useful references. A comprehensive bibliog- 
raphy on speech recognition has recently been pub- 
lished \[53\]. 
3. Noise and Interference Reduct ion - -  Work in 
application of digital speech processing to noise and 
interference reduction was relatively new in 1977, 
and has progressed significantly since that time 
\[89\]. Hardware systems for speech enhancement 
have been developed \[28,153\] and have been shown 
to improve both speech readability and ASR perfor- 
mance under certain conditions of noise and inter- 
ference. 
3.2 Woodard  and  Cupp les  (1983)  
This paper \[159\] did not attempt a comprehensive r - 
view of the state-of-the-art, but instead described se- 
lected military applications in three areas: (1) voice in- 
put for command and control; (2) message sorting by 
voice; and (3) very-low-bit-rate voice communications. 
Current and future applications in the first and third 
areas will be discussed in some detail in the following 
discussions. For a general discussion of message sorting 
and surveillance, the reader is referred to \[159\]. 
3 .3 Other  Rev iews  o f  M i l i ta ry  App l i ca -  
t ions  o f  Speech  Techno logy  
The 1984 National Research Council report by Flana- 
gan, et al, \[38\] contains an excellent review of speech 
recognition system applications to data base manage- 
ment, command and control of weapons ystems, and 
training; a categorization of applications i included, as 
well as a number of specific case studies. Beek and 
Vonusa (1983) \[14\] provide a general review of military 
applications of speech technology, with substantial up- 
dates from the 1977 Beck, et al, paper referred to above. 
An early, but comprehensive, assessment of potential 
military applications of speech understanding systems, 
is provided by Turn, et al, in 1974 \[143\]. The book by 
Lea \[68\] contains useful discussions on both military and 
non-military applications of speech recognition. Other 
applications overviews are presented in \[11,12,13\]. Tay- 
lor (1986) \[140\] provides a more updated review of avion- 
ics applications of speech technology. The Proceedings 
of Military Speech Technology Conferences (1986-1989) 
contain a substantial number of useful summaries of spe- 
cific work in a variety of applications areas. A recent 
update on military applications of audio processing and 
speech recognition is provided in \[29\]. 
3.4 The  NATO Research  Study  Group 
on  Speech  Process ing  
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Re- 
search Study Group on Speech Processing (RSG10) \[87\], 
originally formed in 1977, has as one of its major con- 
tinuing objectives the identification and analysis of po- 
tential military applications of advanced technology. In 
fact the preparation of this paper has been motivated 
by the author's association with RSG10 since 1986 as 
a "technical specialist" in the speech area; much useful 
information for the paper has been provided by other 
RSG10 members, or learned during RSG10 site visits to 
various laboratories in the member NATO countries. 
The RSG10 group has frequently been involved in the 
past in activities aimed at disseminating information 
about speech technology, and military applications in 
particular, to a wider community. For example, in 1983 
the group participated in a NATO Advisory Group for 
Aerospace Research and Development (AGARD) lecture 
series on speech processing \[2\] which included a number 
of important papers on military applications of speech 
recognition \[14,20\]. A similar lecture series was con- 
ducted in 1990, and the papers in that series \[3\] represent 
an up-to-date overview of a number of important opics 
in speech analysis/synthesis and recognition systems for 
military applications. 
In another project, RSG10 established in 1983 a work- 
ing group to look at the human factors aspects of voice 
input/output systems, which are clearly critical to mili- 
tary (or non-military) applications. A workshop on this 
subject ook place in 1986, resulting in a comprehensive 
book \[141\] with papers representative of the state-of-the- 
art in research and applications in the area of multimodal 
person/machine dialogs including voice. 
In addition to its work in assessing speech technology 
and opportunities for military applications, RSG10 has 
continued to initiate and conduct avariety of cooperative 
international projects \[87\], particularly in the areas of 
speech recognition in adverse nvironments, peech data 
base collection, speech recognition performance assess- 
ment, and human factors issues in speech input/output 
435 
systems. 
4 Current Work in Development 
of Military Applications of 
Speech Technology 
