
In this article we want to demonstrate that
annotation of multiword expressions in the
Prague Dependency Treebank is a well de-
fined task, that it is useful as well as feasible,
and that we can achieve good consistency of
such annotations in terms of inter-annotator
agreement. We show a way to measure agree-
ment for this type of annotation. We also ar-
gue that some automatic pre-annotation is
possible and it does not damage the results.
1 Motivation
Various projects involving lexico-semantic annota-
tion have been ongoing for many years. Among those
there are the projects of word sense annotation, usu-
ally for creating training data for word sense disam-
biguation. However majority of these projects have
only annotated very limited number of word senses
(cf. Kilgarriff (1998)). Even among those that aim
towards ?all words? word-sense annotation, multi-
word expressions (MWE) are not annotated adequa-
tely (see (Mihalcea, 1998) or (Hajic? et al, 2004)),
because for their successful annotation a method-
ology allowing identification of new MWEs during
annotation is required. Existing dictionaries that in-
clude MWEs concentrate only on the most frequent
ones, but we argue that there are many more MWEs
that can only be identified (and added to the dictio-
nary) by annotation.
There are various projects for identification of na-
med entities (for an overview see (?evc??kov? et al,
2007)). We explain below (mainly in Section 2) why
we consider named entities to be concerned with lex-
ical meaning. At this place we just wish to recall that
these projects only select some specific parts of text
and provide information only for these. They do not
aim for full lexico-semantic annotation of texts.
There is also another group of projects that have to
tackle the problem of lexical meaning, namely tree-
banking projects that aim to develop a deeper layer
of annotation in adition to a surface syntactic layer.
This deeper layer is generally agreed to concern lex-
ical meaning. Therefore the units of this layer cannot
be words anymore, they should be lexias.
Lexia is defined by Filipec and C?erm?k (1986)
as equivalent to a ?monosemic lexeme? of (Filipec,
1994) or a ?lexical unit? of (Cruse, 1986): ?a pair
of a single sense and a basic form (plus its derived
forms) with relatively stable semantic properties?.
We work with the Prague Dependency Treebank
(PDT, see Hajic? (2005)), which has in addition to
the morphemic and the surface syntactic layers also
the tectogrammatical layer. The latter has been con-
strued as the layer of the (literal) meaning of the sen-
tence and thus should be composed of lexias (lexical
units) and the relations between their occurrences.1
On the tectogrammatical layer only the autose-
mantic words form nodes in a tree (t-nodes). Synse-
mantic (function) words are represented by various
attributes of t-nodes. Each t-node has a lemma: an at-
tribute whose value is the node?s basic lexical form.
Currently t-nodes, and consequently their t-lemmas,
are still visibly derived from the morphological di-
vision of text into tokens. This preliminary handling
1With a few exceptions, such as personal pronouns (that co-
refer to other lexias) or coordination heads.
793
has always been considered unsatisfactory in FGD.2
There is a clear goal to distinguish t-lemmas through
their senses, but this process has not been completed
so far.
Our project aims at improving the current state
of t-lemmas. Our goal is to assign each t-node a
t-lemma that would correspond to a lexia, i.e. that
would really distinguish the t-node?s lexical mean-
ings. To achieve this goal, in the first phase of the
project, which we report on in this paper, we iden-
tify multiword expressions and create a lexicon of
the corresponding lexias.
2 