 only) . . . . . . . . .  67 
Grammatical Compression in Notes and Records: Analysis 
and Cornputdtion Barbara B .  Anderson, Irwin D. J .  Bross, and 
Naomi Sager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 36 : 4 
DAV.ID KLAPPHOLZ AND ABE LOCKMAN 
Department of Elec t r i ca l  E n g i n e e r i n g  
and Computer Science 
Columbla Vniversi t y  
N e w  Yorh, New York 1 0 0 2 7  
ABSTRACT 
With the exception of pranomial reference, little, has been written 
(in the field of computational linguistics) about the phenomenon of reference 
in  natural language. This paper investigates the power and use of 
reference in natural language. and the problems involved in its resolution. 
An algorithm is sketched for accomplishing reference resolution using 
a notion of cross-sentential focus, a mechanism fo r  hypothesizing all  
possible contextual references, and a judgment mechanism for  dis - 
~r i rn ina t i  ng among the hypotheses. 
The reference resolution problem 
The present work began as an attempt to develop a set  of 
algorithms and/or heurietics to enable a primitive-based, inference - 
driven model of a natural language user (Schank 1972 Rieger 1974) to 
properly resolve pronomial references acmee eentence bmndaries. The 
authors quickly realized, however, that the problem of pronomial reference 
resolution is only a .small aspect of a problem which might be termed 
nominal reference resolution, itself but a 8-11 aspect of the problem 'of 
the coherence of d text, (or conversation) i, em the manner in which it 
llmeansu more than the logicd conjunction of the meaningp of its in- 
dividual constituent aentences, 
Examples of tqe f i rs t  problem, i. e. pronomial reference resohtion 
a r e  given in sentence sequences 1-4 below. 
1. Yesterday some boys from our village chased a pack of wild dogs; 
the largest one fell into a ditch. 
2. The wild dogs which forage just outside our village suffer from a 
strange bone-wealeining disealte. Yesterday some boys from our 
village chased a pack of wild dogs* the largeat one broke a leg and 
fell into a ditch. 
3. Yesterday John chased Bill half a block; he was soon out of breath. 
4. My friend Bill has an extremely severe case of asthma. Yesterday 
John chased Bill half a block; he was soon out of breath. 
The ~ r o b l e m  in utterance (text, conversation etc. ) excerpts of the 
above type is #hat of determining the referents of W e  various occurrences 
of the pronouns I '  one, I '  and "heN 
For the moment we simply note that usually preferred referents 
of the two occurreqces of llonell a r e  I1boyl1 and I l d ~ g ~ ~ ,  (examples 1 and 
2 respectively) and those of the two occurrehces of "hew a re  I1Johnl1 
and Bill (exampies 3 and 4 respectively. ) 
The more general p r ~ b l e m  of nominal reference resolution is 
exhibited in ?he following annotated excerpt from a recent newpaper 
article (N. Y. Times 7/15/75, byline Arnold Lubasch); subscripted 
bracketing of the excerpt is intended only to enable later reference to 
specific parts of the text. 
1 [Some of the tnajor provisions of [the state's Fair  Campaign 2 \ were declared unconstitutional here yesterday oy [a special 3 
Federal court] that assailed [the restiictions on election campaigning] 3 4 
as  "repugnant to the right of freedom of speech. " 
5  h he three-judge court, ] whi* was convened to consider a 5 
constitutional challenge by three State As sembly candidates last  year 
threw out [ [the ' code' s] prohibition against attacking any political 6 7 7 
candidate's xa ce, sex, - religion or ethnic background] 6 
*[It]* also overtuned [ [ [ the codets]ll ban lo  on any 9 10 11 
misrepresentation of a candidate1 a party affiliation, position on political 
issues and personal qualifications, including the use af llcharacter 
defamationr1 and scurrilous attacks. I l l 9  
Accordbg to [the caurt1s]12 38-page decision, written by 12 
13  [Judge Henry F. Werber] with &he concurrence of [Judges Leonard 13 14 
P. hdoore, and Mark A. Con~tan t ing]~~ .  15[ 16[the provisions b a ~ h g  116 
misrepresentation Irca st a substantial chill on the expres sion of 
protected speech that a r e  unconstitutionally overbroad and vague. l 1  
If newpaper reporters had a bit more sympathy for those of u s  
concerned with natu-1 language poocessing, the above excerpt might 
have read as  follows: 
The state has a Fair Campaign Code. 
Some of the major provisions of the state's Fair  Campagin Code 
a r e  provisions which restrict something. 
Some of the things restricted by some of the major provisions of 
the state's Fair  Campaign Code which restrict  something a r e  activities 
having to do with election campaigning. 
Same of the activities having to do with election campaigning which 
a r e  restricted by some of the major ,provisions of the state's Fair  
Campaign Code whioh restrict something are attacking a political 
candidate's race, sex, religions or  ethnic background and misrepresent- 
ing a) candidate1 s party affiliation, position on political is sue s . . . 
Last year three state assembly canddiates filed a constihtional 
challenge to some of the major provisions of the state's Fair  Campaign 
Code which restrict  something. 
Y esterday a special Federal court declared unconstitutional thou of the 
major provisione of the state's Fair  Campaign Code which restrict  . 
something . . , 
The p& is that in order for  a machine or a human to validly 
claim to have Ilunder~tood~~ the original excerpt& helshelit  must be able 
at  the very least to dekonstrate that he/she/it  has established the 
following relationships between various items occurring in the excerpt. 
(Iqtegers ap rbsen t  subscripted bracketed regments of the original excerpt. ) 
(f)  The identity of 2 ,  7, and 11 
(ii) The identity of 3, 5, 8, and 12 
(iii) The fact that 4, 6, 9, and 15 a re  elements, subsets or  p a f b  of 1 
(iv) The fact that 13 and 14 a re  members of 3 
and on and on and on. (I. em a closer analysis of the original excerpt 
reveals many more relationships which must be established before 
llundeirstandingu may be clamed. ) 
It people sctually wrotelspoke in the style of the somewhat 
facetious paraphrase of the original excerpt, the nominal reference 
problem would be reduced to one of matching lexcial patterns and 
recognising a few syntactic cues; to state the obvious, the necessity for 
more* succinct linguistic communication has forced the development of 
elliptical devices which shia  the burden of nominal reference resolution 
from syntactic analysis to an analysis of the Hsemanticsll of sentences 
in context. More specifically, nominal references cannot in general be 
resolved without the use of general semantic infarmation a s  well as  
specific world knowledge. 
While the fact that syntactic a-lysis alone i s  insufficient for 
understmding is  anything but novel, the question of the magnitude of the 
nominal reference problem and of its solution1 s crucial dependence upon 
local context seems to have been little commented upon. (Clark (1975) 
discussee the problem from a viewpoint different from that of this paper, ) 
The reader who remains unconvinced by the examples above that 
local context (and specific world knowledge relating to local context) 
must play a crucial role in reference resolution i s  asked to consider the 
two sentence sequences 5a, 6, and 5b, 6. 
5. a. The founding fathers had a difficult time agreeing on how the 
basic laws governing our country should be framed. 
b. Those foolish people a t  the country club have spent an incredible 
amount of time arguing about club rules. 
6. The second article of the constitution, for example, was argued 
about for months before agreement was reached. 
In sentence sequence 5a, 6, Itthe second articlett  clearly refers to 
the second article of the constitution of the United States, while in 
sentence sequence 5b, 6, the reference i s  to the second article of the 
constitution of the country club. In each case the only factor involved 
in resolving the reference is the semantic content of i ts  10-1 aontext- 
in this case the meaning of the sentende preceding the one in which tke 
reference occurs. 
Since the lexical item Itthe constitutiontt appears in the example 
just considered, a word- concerning such proper-noun-like objects is in 
order. In any language ?here a re  lexical Items and phrases such as 
those appearing in 7 below, which, in the absence of compelling 
alternative, have standard default ref erentsf for example the standard 
default referents of the items in 7 a r e  the corresponding items in 8 
7. a. The constitution 
b. The founding fathers 
c. Wall Street 
d. The establishment 
e. The presiaent 
f. Madison Avenue 
8. a. The constitution of the U. S. 
b. The flhnding fathers of the U. S. 
C. The U. S. business. community (or that par t  of it residing in 
New Yotk City. ) 
d. Those people who have the power to influence the course of events 
in the nation etc. etc. 
e. The president of the U. S. 
f. The advertising industry. 
In order for textual occurrm-ce of such proper-noun-like objects to be 
properly handled, their standard default referents must be listed in the 
lexicon. This is not to say that occurrences of proper-noun-like objects 
cannot be references to objects occurring previously in the text; rather 
-
it is the case that their default options must also be considered a s  
possible referents. 
As  final examples of the reference resolution problem let  us  con- 
sider sentence sequences 9 and 10 below. 
9. The president was shot while riding in a motorcade down one of the 
major boulevards of Dallas yesterday; it caused a panic on Wall 
Street. 
10. John was invited to tea at the Quimbyls last  Saturday; he would have 
loveq to go, but he knew held be busy then. 
In example 9, while t&e first sentence of the eequence contains a 
number of noun objects (president, motorcade, boulevards, Dallas) 
which a r e  potential referents for the occurrence of r l i t l l  in the second 
sentence, none of the these is in fact, the proper referent; rather, the 
proper referent of I f i t l t  i s  the event (or fact) that "The president was 
shot while . . . . I t  
In example 10 we have an instance of an  adverbial reference 
("thenf1) which must be recognized a s  referring to flyesterday" rather 
than bo some non adverbial object occurring in the f i r s t  sentence of 
that example, 
Sketch of a Solution 
F r s m  the point of view of computer implementation, the problem 
of nominal reference resolution is one of creating tokens for noun 
objects mentioned in a text, and discovering and encoding the relations, 
alluded to in the text, which hold between them and various other tokens 
in memory. 
This problem, though certainly not i t  s magnitude or  ramifications, 
was noticed by Rieger (1974) in his poineering implementation of a 
primitive-based model of a natural language user. Riegerls system, 
however, suffers from the incredible inefficiency r esuIting f rom its  need 
to search all  of memory in order to attempt any reference resolution; 
in addition it will often miss a quite obvious referent entirely, and, in 
fact, resolves non-pronomial references only accidentally i f  at all. 
Before presenting a sketch of a proposed solution to the nominal 
reference resolution problem, it would be well to detail more precisely 
the overall language processing enviornment within which it i s  meint  to 
operate and of which it is a most necessary part. 
First,  we adsume that a relatively small set, S, of semantic 
primitives and $ logical-calculus -like language, L, for expressing 
ltmeaningsll a r e  available. The set  S and language L must satisfy the 
following two conditions. 
(i) The predicate, function, and constant eymbols of L a r e  members of 
S .  
(ii) There is a one-to-o* mapping f rom meanings of (natural language) 
sentences to formulas of L. 
While a set of prki i t ives  and a meaning representation language 
even demonstably close to satisfying the above conditions have yet to be 
produced, we will, in examples to follow, make use of meaning represen 
tations; the only claim we will make for them is that the functibns 
served by their constituent constructs must be served by the elements 
of any adequate system. 
In addition to a meaning representation scheme we will assume en 
encoding of world knowledge of the sort  which a lltypicallt adult might 
possess, again with the same obvious caveat. 
While the question of translation from natural language sentence8 
to'meaning representations will not be touched upon here ,  we will 
sasume sentence -by- sentence translation of the sort  exhibited in various 
examples to follow. 
The solution  PO the reference resolution problem res ts  in recog- 
nizing the fact that reference is an elliptical device, and +that the 
human under stander of. natural language cannot recapture that which was 
elided once he is too far from it in the text; in fact, he cannot resolve 
a reference to a p i n t  in the text more than a few-sentences back with- 
out going back and pondering i t  (if he can do so at all). We should note 
that this i s  true even ih the case in which the referent doesn't 
actually appear in the text, but appears only in an inference f rom some 
statement made in the text. In this latter case - a case which we will 
discuss only a t  the very end of this paper the reference is not resolvable 
(and would not therefore have Been made by the c ~ e a t o r  of the text in the 
first place). unless the statement from which the inference is made 
appears shortly before in the text . Though we cannot say precisely 
how far back i s  meant by. "shortly before, " it is certainly no more than 
a few sentences. Fbr a given sentence, S, appearing in a text we will 
refer to the gequence of sentences preceding S by no more than the 
intended distance as the focus of S. 
In terms of computer implementation, we will, in the processing of 
a text (which we conc-eive of as proceeding sentence-by-sentence), 
maintain the following focus sets. 
%bje CJ' 
(i) The noun-object focus - the set of tokens of a noun meaning re -  
presentation~ of the focus of S (where S is the bentence currently. 
being processed) 
(ii) The event focus - a  set aontaining, for every sentence W in the 
focus of S, the object EVENT(F), where F i s  the meaninq 
representation of W, and EVENT i s  a function which maps the 
meaning of a formula, F, into a noun-like object whose meaning 
is "the event (or fact) that F" 
(iii) The time focus - a set containing taken8 for all time references 
(e. g, yesterday, five olclock, etc. ) occurring in the meaninq 
representation of the focus of S. 
The reader may question our inclusion of every object appearing 
in the meaning xepresentation of the focus of S in one of the above focus 
sets, i. e. in the set  of potential referents. In fact, however, it seems 
to be the case that any object (of one of the above-mentioned types) 
occurring in the meaning representation of the focus of S may be the 
referent of an object occurring later  in the meaning representation of S. 
Sonsidex, for example, the sentence sequences formed by taking each of 
he sentences af 12 below, - in turn - as an immediate continuation of a text 
zontaining sentence 1 1 below. 
11. Stan argued with his s i s ter  Fran in an attempt to convince her that 
she should bring Mary, whom he would like to get to knpw, on their 
planned t r ip  to the San Diego Zoo tomor~ow. 
12. a. - He was really insistent. 
b. - She was hard to convince. 
C. - It was useless. 
d. He thinks - she's the prettiest one of all  Frads friends. 
e. The prospect really excites him. 
f. He arguecl that - f t  wouldn't tie Mary up for m o r e  than half a day. 
g. - It's ?he best one in the country, you know. 
h. - She thruught - it was a twr ib le  idea. 
i. She happened to be busy then, but expressed a n  interest in coming 
along ahother the. 
Ea& of the mderlined items in sentences 12a-12i references some 
object in senten- 11. (For the sake of clarity we present in 13 below 
the referents a s  we understand them, ) 
13, a, Stan 
b. Fran 
c. The attempt (to convince , . . 
d. Mary 
em EVENT \Stan will get to know Mary) 
f. The trip 
g. The San Diego Zoo 
h. Both --- @he a& it a r e  ambiuous; if - she is taken to be "Fran, l1  then 
it refers to EXENT (Fran will bring Mary ,. .); i f  - she is taken 
to be "Maryll), then - it refers  to EVENT (Mary will come.. . ) 
The point i s ,  of course, that any item in (the meaning representa- 
tion of) a sentence, S, may be referenced by some item in (the mean- 
ing repr eeentation of) a latter sentence. 
On the other side of the coin the question of identifying potential re-  
-
ferences is just a s  important a s  that of identifying the seb of all  
possible referents for an object which is known to reference something. 
If we were' concerned only with pronomial referenee reaolution, the 
problem would have a simple solution; every pronoun is a reference. 
For  nominal items other than pronouns the problem is far less simple; 
if a noun occurs in a text just how do we know if there i s  a previously 
occurring nominal item to which it refers? As much a s  we would like 
there to be algorithmically testable criteria, i. e. recognizable syntactic 
and/or semantic cues, for making the decision, there seem to be none. 
Thus, the mechanism we propose considers every token appearing 
in the translation of a sentence as a possible reference. 
At present, we hypothesize the existence of a small set, R, of 
relations which a re  suffvient to account for all  instances of nominal 
reference. Included in this set a r e ,  a t  the very least, the relations 
identity, member of, subset of, and part of. Noje that although this 
list of relations im quite small, it suffices to handle all  the examples of 
reference presented thus far (i. e. those occurring in sentence sequences 
1-6 and 9-12 as well as those occurring in the excerpted newpaper 
article above). 
Al l  of the above observations taken together lead to the following 
sketch of an algorithm for reference resolution. 
I. #AS each new sentence, S, is transrated into its meaning representation, 
the various focus sets (noun-object, event, time) a r e  updated. 
11. A set, H, is formed containing all tuples of t&e form (N1, N2, P )  such 
'that N1 is a nominal item occurring in(the meaning representation 
of S, Nz is an object occurring in the focus set (noun-object, 
event, or time) appropriate to N1 , and i s  a member of R; H 
is the set  of all current refewnce hypotheses arising-from S. 
III. A lljudgment mechanism, " discussed below, is invoked to determine 
the liklihoods of the correctness of the various members of H. 
It i s  clear that following step II any further processing of reference 
hypotheses requires that all members of H be considered relahive to one 
avther, since the correctness or  incorrectness of one may depend 
crucially upon that of others. In the general case not all hypotheses will 
turn out to be correct, and in fact some may contradict o thers  - for 
instance in the case of two hypothesis-triples with identical f i r s t  and 
second elements and different third elements. 
Once it  has been created, the set  H is submitted to a "judgment 
mechanismft whose task it i s  to choose some of the hypotheses a s  valid 
and others a s  invalid. The judgement mechanism must clearly have 
access to the world knowledge stored in memory, and must be capable of 
performing inferencing of a sort which produces decisions a s  to the 
relative Eklihoods of the various hypotheses. 
Before giving example8 of just how such a judgment mechanism 
might work, we should make it clear that our sense of I1inferencing1l is very 
different from Riegerls (1974). In Riegerls sense inferencing is un- 
directed, while ours is directed toward the goal of val idat i~g hypotheses. 
There is, in addition, another sense in which the sor t  of inferencing to 
be done by the judgment mechanism is directed. The fact that the rgasons 
for validating or  throwing out a particular reference hypothesis (on the 
part  of human natural language users) involve the information coweyed in 
local context as well a s  world knowledge relating to items contained in 
that information (and world knowledge relating to items contained in world 
knowledge relating to items contained in that information, ctc. ) constitutes 
a good guess as to the particular pieces of world kncrwledge and the rules 
of inference which must be involved in judging that hypothesis. 
Ekamples of reference resolation 
14 and 15 below contain components of possible meaning repfek 
sentations of the two sentencel of sentence sequence 1 at the beginning 
of this paper. 
14. C 1 : CHASED (xl, q) 
C2: TIME (cis YESTERDAY) 
C3: SUBSET ( x  [BOYS]) 
C4: SUBSET (x~ ,  [DOGS]) 
C5: GREATER (SIZE(xl),l) 
C6: GREATER (SIZE (IS,), 1) 
15, C7: FALL INTO (yI, y2) 
C8: TIME (C7, PAST) 
C9: MEMBER (y,, [DITCH]) 
?30: MEMBER(yl,y3) 
C11: LARGEST (yl, y3) 
'The meaning reprecentations proposed for the two sentences a r e  
C1A%hGhGAC5AC& and G7hCshCo A C ~ O A C ~ ~  respectively. Note that we are 
not claiming that the predicates CHASED, and FALL INTO and the constants 
YESTERDAY, BOY, DOG, PAST and DITCH a r e  a t  the leve3. of semantic 
primitives; rather, the above analyses a r e  at just the level which we need 
to illustate the operation of the reference resolution mechanism. Further - 
more, the symbols YESTERDAY, BOY, DOG, PAST and DITCH ahould 
be taken a s  pointers to the definitions of the appropriate items encoded 
in memory in whatever fashion. The brackethg in the notation [A], where 
A is a pointer to a definition, is meant to be a function which takes A 
into an object whose meaning ie  the class of items satisfying the meaning 
pointed to by A. 
Once the translation of the f irs t  sentence of sequence 1 into its 
meaning representation has been completed - on the assumption that that 
sentence is at the beginning of the text being processed - the various 
focus sem will contain the followkg: 
no.- object focus: [xl, xz) ; event fbcps.: [(cfic21\~/\chcd\~~ ) 3  ; 
time focus [YESTERDAY ] . 
After the second sentence i s  translated the set, H, of reference - 
triple hypotheses presented to the judgment mechanism will then be the 
following : 
i s  a member of 
is a sqbget of 
i s ~ p a r t  of 
Note that no member of the event focus occurrs in H because the 
translation of the second sentence contains no term of the form EVENT(y); for  
s i m p l i c a e  omit the question of time referencing. 
All of the relations between y2 and xl or rt can be ruled out 
pn the basis of SUBSET (x,, [DOC]) SUBSET (xl. [BOY]), MEMBER 
Or,, [DITCH]) and of the world knowledge to the effect that boysldogs 
cannot be identical to, members of, eubsets of or parts of ditches (of 
course in some weird fairy tale setting one of these might be possible 
and shouldn't be thrown out; but in such a case local context would 
inform us of the "weirdrr situation and the appropriate one wouldn't be 
thrown out. ) 
The hypothesis that or  y3 i s  a part of either xl or xz can be 
20  
ruled out on the basis of SUBSET (q, [BOY]) and SUBSET (x,, [DOG]), 
which tell us that q and x2 a r e  sets  of objects, and the world 
knowledge that sets  don't have "partsi1 in the sense of the "part of1! 
relation. 
Identify between yl and either XI or  x2 can be ruled out on the 
basis of MEMBER (yl , y3) which tells us that yl i s  an ihdividual and 
SUBSET (x1, [BOY]), SUBSET (x2, [DOG]), GREATER (SIZE (x,), l), 
and GREATER (SIZE (xz), 11, which tell us that xl and x2 are sets  
containing more than one object. (Remember that we're not doing 
axiomatic se t  theory in which there a r e  no lgindividuals in our sense 
and in which the sor t  of ll-iindividualll which is dealt with can be a subset 
of some set. ) 
Fmally, the "member of" relation between y3 and either xl or x2 
can be ruled out pn the basie of MEMBER (yl, y3) which requires thpt 
y3 be a set, SUBSET (xl, [BOY]), SUBSET (x ,  [DOG]), GREATER 
(SIZE (xl), I), and GREATER (SIZE (x2), 1), which tell  us that x1 and x2 
a r e  sets containing more thad one element each, and the fact that sets  
are not members of sets. (Again, we're not dealing with set theory; if 
in fact, we were - talking about axiomatic set  theory in English, then 
local context would contain that information, and aiff erent inferences 
would come into play. ) 
This leaves us with the following hypotheses : 
is identical to 
' {is a subset o f j  [ : j  
y, is a member of { :g 
But some of these hypotheses are consistent with one another: in fact 
the hypotheses 
i e  identical to 
X. i = l , 2  
1 is  a subset of 
-C 3 
imply the hypotheses 
yl is  a member of x. i = l , 2  
1 
respectively because of MEMBER (yl, y,). At any rate, the judgment 
mechanism assumes at this point that either yl is a member of xl or 
yl i s  a member of x2. The readear is asked to recall at this point 
that in presenting the usually preferred referents for references in 
sentence sequences 1-4 the claim was made that in sentence sequence 1, 
the usually preferred referent for "onefr is  lfboys." The reason for this 
claim is  the authort s observation. that, when such a pronomial refercnce 
occurs a s  the surface subject of a sentence, in the absence of semantic 
content which discrminates among the various possible referents, most 
people seem to take the eurface subject of the last sentence in the focus 
a s  the inbnded referent. The reason for this human judgment is probably 
that the readerlhearer takes the surface subject to b e  the "topicll of a 
sentence. If this observation is correct, the judgment mechanism should, 
in the current example, simply choose "one of the boysr1 (yl is a member 
of xl) as  the proper referent. If this observation i s  incorrect, the judgment 
mechaaism should judge that there is ambiguity in the reference 'lone 
Sentence sequence 2 at  the beginning of this paper would be handled 
in precisely the same manner a s  sentence sequence 1 up to the point at 
which 11y3 is a member of xl1I and "y, i s  a member of x," were the r e -  
maining hypotheses. The knowledge that Ifthe dogsLt refer red to suffer 
from a strange bone -weakening diaease would bhen cause the judgment 
mechaniam to strengthen the likelihood that tlonell refers to "dogs, thus 
causing Ityl is a member of x," to be the preferred judgment. 
Sentence sequence16 below contains an example of EVENT reference. 
16. The presidnet was shot yesterday. It caused a panic on Wall Street. 
Omitting all  other details of the translation into meaning representation we 
simply note that the primitive -level predicate into which cause" is tranq- 
lated requires an object of the form EVENT (F) as its subject (i. e. if we 
say something like "John caused a stir" what we mean is that John did 
something and the event (or fact) that he did that caused a stir.) Thus, 
when the 2nd sentence is handled, the only possible referents for will 
be the objects contained in the EVENT focus, namely just EVENT (the 
president was shot yesterrlay). The judgment mechanism thus must s k p l y  
decide if the event (or fact) that the president was shot yesterday was likely 
to have caused a panic on Wall Street, a judgment which, with adequate 
world knowledge, should certainly be confirmed. 
Sentence sequence 17 is a very similar case. 
17. The president was shot yesterday. Bill told me all about it. It 
caused a panic on Wall Street. 
In order to resolve the reference 'lit" in the last sentence of 17, the 
judgment mechanism would have to decide on the relative likelihoods of 
i and ii below 
(i) The event (or fact) that the president was shot yesterday caused a 
panic on Wall Street. 
(ii) The event (ok fact) that Bill told me about the president being shot 
yesterday cauaed a panic on Wall Street. 
Again, with the availability of reasonable world knowledge about such 
things a s  presidents, their being shot and panics, the judgment mechanism 
should be able to choose the proper referent for "it1I 
While a fully detailed specification of the judgment mechanism must 
await further investigation, the above examples should illustrate, at least 
in part, the manner in which we conceive of i ts  operation. 
Conclusions 
The phenomenon with which we have been dealing is one example of 
what we would like to call the llcreativefl aspect of language use; more 
specifically, reference of the sort  we have described - and attempted to 
handle - is an elliptical device necessary for effective communication; 
moreover, it is a device which exhibits the ability of language to "change 
the ground rulestf in a very flexible and fluid manner in response to 
context. 
At this point we must admit that there is an even more creative 
type of reference than the sort we have dealt with. 18 below is an 
example of this type of reference. 
18. Last week I caught a cold while vieiting my mother in Chicago; as 
ueual , the chicken eoup had too much pepper in it. 
The interesting reference in the above example i s  ILchickeh soup. There 
i s  no item in the first  sentence to which it is directly related; on the 
other hand, few people have any trouble resolving it by interpolating 
between the two sentences of example 18 the idea expressed in sentence 19 
below: 
1,q. When I get sick my mother makes me chicken soup. 
If sentence 19 were available, our reference resolution mechanism would 
easily come up with an identity relation between the two occurrences 
of I t  chicken eoup Obviously, for our proposed mechanism to resolve 
this reference, some sort  of inferencing must f i rs t  work on the 1st 
sentence of 18 to produce the meaning of 19 a s  an inference. Thus it is 
clear that reference resolution and general inferencing must be inter - 
leaved. 
The mechanism proposed abave does not handle the entire problem. 
It does, however, seem to be a minimal model of reference resoIdtion 
(minimal in the sense that at least this much must be going on). In 
addition, it provides for that control over the use of general inferencing 
which is required to avoid a combinatbrial explosion (BOOM). 
References 
Clark, H. H. (1975), I1Bridging1I, Conference on Theoretical Is sues in 
Natural Language Processing, 10 -13 June 1975, Cambridge, Mass. 
Rieger, C. J. (1974), Conceptual Memory: A Theory and Computer 
Program for Processing the Meaning Content of Natural Language Utterences, 
Ph.D. Thesis. Stanford University. 1974. 
Schaak, R. (1972), I1Conceptual Dependency: A Theory of Natural Language 
Under standing, Cognitive psycho lo^ 3(4), 1972. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Miaofiche 36 : 26 
How DOES A SYSTEM KNOW WHEN TO STOP INFERENCING?* 
The Moore School  o f  E l e c t r i c a l  Engineer ing  
U n i v e r s i t y  o f  Pennsy lvania ,  P h i l a d e l p h i a  19174 
Abstract The problem of constmining the set of hfemtces added t o  a set of 
beliefs is considered. One method, based on finding a minimal unifying 
structure, is frresented and discussed. The method is meant t o  pnxride 
internal criteria for  inference cut-off. 
I. 