 
The MiTAP prototype for SARS detection 
uses human language technology for detect-
ing, monitoring, and analyzing potential indi-
cators of infectious disease outbreaks and 
reasoning for issuing warnings and alerts. Mi-
TAP focuses on providing timely, multi-
lingual information access to analysts, domain 
experts, and decision-makers worldwide. Data 
sources are captured, filtered, translated, 
summarized, and categorized by content. 
Critical information is automatically extracted 
and tagged to facilitate browsing, searching, 
and scanning, and to provide key terms at a 
glance. The processed articles are made avail-
able through an easy-to-use news server and 
cross-language information retrieval system 
for access and analysis anywhere, any time. 
Specialized newsgroups and customizable fil-
ters or searches on incoming stories allow us-
ers to create their own view into the data 
while a variety of tools summarize, indicate 
trends, and provide alerts to potentially rele-
vant spikes of activity. 
1 
2 
Background 
Potentially catastrophic biological events that threaten 
US national security are steadily increasing in fre-
quency. These events pose immediate danger to ani-
mals, plants, and humans. Current disease surveillance 
systems are inadequate for detecting indicators early 
enough to ensure the rapid response needed to combat 
these biological events and corresponding public reac-
tion. Recent examples of outbreaks include both the 
HIV/AIDS and foot and mouth pandemics, the spread of 
West Nile virus to and across the US, the escape of Rift 
Valley Fever from Africa, SARS, and the translocation 
of both mad cow disease (BSE) and monkey pox to the 
United States.  
Biological surveillance systems in the United States 
rely most heavily on human medical data for signs of 
epidemic activity. These systems span multiple organi-
zations and agencies, are often not integrated, and have 
no alerting capability. As a result, responders have an 
insufficient amount of lead time to prepare for biologi-
cal events or catastrophes. 
Indications and Warnings (I&Ws) provide the poten-
tial for early alert of impending biological events, per-
haps weeks to months in advance. Sources of I&Ws 
include transportation data, telecommunication traffic, 
economic indices, Internet news, RSS feeds (RSS) in-
cluding weblogs, commerce, agricultural surveillance, 
weather, and other environmental data. Retrospective 
analyses of major infectious disease outbreaks (e.g., 
West Nile Virus and SARS) show that I&Ws were pre-
sent weeks to months in advance, but these indicators 
were missed because data sources were difficult to ob-
tain and hard to integrate. As a result, the available in-
formation was not utilized for appropriate national and 
international response. This illuminates a critical need in 
biodefense for an integrated system linking I&Ws for 
biological events from multiple and disparate sources 
with the response community. 
