 
This demonstration  provides a historical 
perspective of a number of  research and 
commercial systems in Spoken Language 
Technology over the past 20+ years.  A 
series of chronologically ordered video 
clips from many sources will  be  pre-
sented to illustrate the many steps and the 
tremendous progress that has been 
achieved over the years. The clips them-
selves are drawn from diverse academic 
and commercial research labs, product 
presentations, and user applications. All 
show systems being demonstrated  or in 
actual use. Over 20 different laboratory 
systems, products, and companies are rep-
resented in this collection of video mate-
rials. Each of the clips has previously 
been shown publicly. The present selec-
tion primarily focuses on speech and 
natural language systems for speech rec-
ognition and synthesis. Additional contri-
butions to this collection are welcome. 
 
1.   Project Description 
 
Preparations of these materials are being done in 
conjunction with the History of Speech and Lan-
guage Technology Project being conducted by 
Saras Institute, in affiliation with the Dibner Insti-
tute for the History of Science and Technology, at 
MIT (Cambridge, MA).  The overall mission for 
this project is to collect, preserve, and make readily 
available information about significant research 
discoveries, technical achievements, and business 
developments in speech and language technology. 
For further information on this project, please go to 
www.SarasInstitute.org.  
Work on this project is on-going. Additional 
contributions of relevant materials are welcome in 
the area of Spoken Language Technology, includ-
ing speech and natural language systems and ap-
plications incorporating speech recognition, speech 
synthesis, interactive dialogue, information re-
trieval, machine translation, multimodal interfaces, 
etc. Please contact us at HistSpch@mit.edu if you 
have materials you would like to contribute or with 
any inquiries, updates, corrections, and sugges-
tions.  
  
2.   