s, pages 21?24,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Textual Entailment 
Mark Sammons, University of Illinois
Idan Szpektor, Yahoo!
V.G. Vinod Vydiswaran, University of Illinois
The NLP and ML communities are rising to grander, larger-scale
challenges such as Machine Reading, Learning by Reading, and Learning
to Read, challenges requiring deeper and more integrated natural
language understanding capabilities.
The task of Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) requires automated
systems to identify when two spans of text share a common meaning --
for example, that ``Alphaville Inc.'s attempted acquisition of Bauhaus
led to a jump in both companies' stock prices'' entails ``Bauahaus'
stock rose'', but not ``Alphaville acquired Bauhaus''.  This general
capability would be a solid proxy for Natural Language Understanding,
and has direct relevance to the grand challenges named above.
Moreover, it could be used to improve performance in a large range of
Natural Language Processing tasks such as Information Extraction,
Question Answering, Exhaustive Search, Machine Translation and many
others.  The operational definition of Textual Entailment used by
researchers in the field avoids commitment to any specific knowledge
representation, inference method, or learning approach, thus
encouraging application of a wide range of techniques to the problem.
Techniques developed for RTE have now been successfully applied in the
domains of Question Answering, Relation Extraction, and Machine
translation, and RTE systems continue to improve their performance
even as the corpora on which they are evaluated (provided first by
PASCAL, and now by NIST TAC) have become progressively more
challenging.  Over the sequence of RTE challenges from PASCAL and NIST
TAC, the more successful systems seem to have converged in their
overall approach.
The goal of this tutorial is to introduce the task of Recognizing
Textual Entailment to researchers from other areas of NLP.  We will
identify and analyze common inference and learning approaches from a
range of the more successful RTE systems, and investigate the role of
knowledge resources.  We will examine successful applications of RTE
techniques to Question Answering and Machine Translation, and identify
key research challenges that must be overcome to continue improving
RTE systems.
21
Tutorial Outline
1. 