 
Concept) 
in+N8 (N8ffiMeans) NS+de/NS+niyoru 
? No rules. +de/+no 
? A kind of +wo-kite/ 
idiom \[7\] to +wo-kita 
be retrieved +wo-kakete/ 
directly from +wo-kaketa 
a lexicon. 
English Examples 
in California 
in Spring 
in two days 
in my opinion 
in Z-method 
(speak) in English 
in uniform 
in spectacles 
(i0) To get back to the previous findings (I) 
and (2), the heuristic approach was also found to 
be effective in segmenting the input English 
sentence into a sequence of phrasal elements, and 
in structuring them into a tree-llke dependency 
diagram (cf. Figure 2). 
(Ii) A practical machine translation should be 
considered from a kind of heuristic viewpoint 
rather than from a purely rigid analytical 
linguistic viewpoint. One persuasive reason for 
this is the fact that humans, even foreign 
language learners, can translate fairly difficult 
English sentences without going into the details 
of parsing problems. 
IV SEMANTICS DIRECTED APPROACH: 
A PROTOTYPE JAPANESE-ENGLISH 
MACHINE TRANSLATION SYSTEM 
The pro to type  model system for  Japanese- 
Eng l i sh  t rans la t ion  i s  const ruc ted  as a semant ics  
d i rec ted  processor  us ing  a conceptua l  dependency 
diagram as the internal representation. 
Noteworthy findings through operational 
experience and efforts to improve on the 
prototype model are as follows: 
163 
(I) Considering some of the characteristics of 
the Japanese language, such as flexible word 
ordering and ambiguous usage of function words, 
it is not advantageous to adopt a syntax directed 
representation for the internal base of language 
transformation. 
For example, the following five Japanese 
sentences have almost the same meaning except for 
word ordering and a subtle nuance. Lowercase 
letters represent function words. 
Boku wa Fude de Tegami wo Kaku. 
(11 (brush)(with)(letter) (write) 
Boku wa tegami wo Fude de Kaku. 
Fude de Boku wa Tegami wo Kaku. 
Tegami wa Boku wa Fude de Kaku. 
Boku wa Tegami wa Fude de Kaku. 
(2) Therefore we have decided to adopt the 
conceptual dependency diagram (CDD) as a compact 
and powerful semantics directed internal 
representation. 
Our idea of the CDD is similar to the 
well-known dependency grammar defined by Hays 
\[4\] and Robinson \[9\] \[i0\], except for the 
augmented case markers which play essentially 
semantic roles. 
(31 The conceptual dependency diagram for 
Japanese sentences is composed of predicate 
phrase nodes (PPNs in abbreviationl and nominal 
phrase nodes (NTNs in abbreviation). Each PPN 
governs a few NPNs as its dependants. Even among 
PPNs there exist some governor-dependant 
relationships. 
Examples of formal CDD description are: 
PPN (NPNI, NPN2, ... N-PNnl, 
Kaku (Boku, Te~ami, Fude), 
Write (I, Letter, Brus--~'~, 
where the underlined word "~' represents the m 
concept code corresponding to the superficial 
word "a", and the augmented case markers are 
omitted. 
In the avove description, the order of 
dependants NI, N2, ..., Nn are to be neglected. 
For example, 
PPN (NPNn, ..., NPN2, NPNI) 
is identical to the above first formula. This 
convention may be different from the one defined 
by Hays \[4\]. Our convention was introduced to 
cope with the above-mentioned flexible word 
ordering in Japanese sentences. 
(4) The aforementioned dependency relationships 
can be represented as a linking topology, where 
each link has one governor node and one dependant 
node as its top and bottom terminal point (Figure 
4). 
(5) The links are labeled with case markers. 
Our case marker system is obtained by augmenting 
the traditional case markers such as Fillmore's 
\[3\] from the standpoint of machine translation. 
For the PPN-NPN link, its label usually 
represents agent, object, goal, location, topic, 
etc. For the PPN-PPN link, its label is usually 
represent causality, temporality, 
restrictiveness, etc. (cf. Figure 4). 
PPN' 
PPN ~'C4  --~ Kaku Write __  -~ . J  /T0\ /T0  
NPN I NPN 2 NPN 3 8oku Tegaml Fude I Letter Brush 
* CI: case markar 
Figure 4 Examples of a Conceptual Dependency 
Diagram (CDD) 
(6)  As for  the  to ta l  number of  case  markers ,  our 
cur rent  conc lus ion  i s  that  the number of  
compulsory  case  markers  to represent  p red icat ive  
dominance shou ld  be smal l ,  say around 20; and 
that  the  number of  opt iona l  case  markers  to 
represent adjective or adverbial modification 
should be large, say from 50 to 70 (Table 6). 
(7) The reason for the large number of optional 
case markers is that the detailed classification 
of optional cases is very useful for making an 
appropriate selection of prepositions and 
participles (Table 7). 
(g) Each NPN is to be labeled with some properly 
selected semantic features which are under the 
control of a thesaurus type lexicon. Semantic 
features are effective to disambiguate 
predicative dependency so as to produce an 
appropriate English verb phrase. 
(9) The essential difference between a Japanese 
sentence and the equivalent English sentence can 
be grasped as the difference in the mode of PPN 
selections, taken from the viewpoint of 
conceptual dependency diagram (Figure 51. Once 
an appropriate PPN selection is made, it will be 
rather simple and mechanical to determine the 
rest of the dependency topology. 
(I0) Thus the essential task of Japanese-English 
translation can be reduced to the task of 
constructing the rules for transforming the 
dependency topology by changing PPNs, while 
preserving the meaning of the original dependency 
topology (cf. Figure 5). 
(Ill All the aforementioned findings have 
something to do with the semantic directed 
approach. Once the English oriented conceptual 
dependency diagram is obtained, the rest of the 
translation process is rather syntactic. That 
is, the phrase structure generation can easily be 
handled with somewhat traditional syntax directed 
processors. 
164 
(12) As is well known, the Japanese language has 
a very high degree of complexity and ambiguity 
mainly caused by frequent ellipsis and functional 
multiplicity, which creates serious obstacles for 
the achievement of a totally automatic treatment 
of "raw" Japanese sentences. 
(ex i) "Sakana wa Taberu." 
(fish) (eat) 
has at least two different interpretations: 
? "\[Sombody\] can eat a fish." 
. "The fish may eat \[something\]." 
Table 6 Case Markers for CDD (subset only) 
Predicative A Agent 
Dominance 0 Object 
(Compulsory) C Complement 
R Recipient 
AC Agent in Causative 
T Theme, Topic (Mental Subject )  
P Par tner  
Q Quote 
RI Range of Interest 
RQ Range of Qualification 
RM Range of Mention 
I Instrument 
E Element 
Adverbial CT Goal in Abstract Collection 
Modification CF Source in Abstract Collection 
(Optional) TP Point in Time 
Adjective ET Embedding Sentence Type Modifier 
Modification whose gapping is Theme 
(Optional) EA whose gapping is Agent 
EO whose gapping is Object 
Link and ~" ilnking through "AND" 
Conjunction BT Conjunction through "BUT" 
(Optional) . . . . . . . . .  
(ex 2) "Kawaii Ningyou wo Motteiru Onnanoko." 
(lovely) (doll) (carry) (girl) 
has also two different interpretations: 
"The lovel~ ~irl who carries a doll with 
her." 
"The girl who carries a lovel\[ doll with 
her." 
(13) Thus we have judged that  some sub- Japanese  
language should  be const ructed  so as to res t r i c t  
the input  Japanese  sentences  w i th in  a range of  
clear tractable structures. The essential 
restrictions given by the sub-language should be 
concerned with the usage of function words and 
sentential embeddings. 
Table 7 Detailed Classification of Optional Case 
Markers for Modification (subset only) 
Phase Code Most-Likely Prepositions or Participles 
F 
T 
D 
P 
I 
O 
V 
U 
S 
B 
A 
AL 
H 
AB 
SE 
WI 
?.. 
from 
to, till 
during 
at 
in, inside 
out, outside 
over, above 
under, below 
bes ide 
before, in front of 
after, behind 
along 
through 
over, superior to 
apart from 
within 
. Case Marker E Body Code + Phase Code 
? Body Code ~ T (=Time)IS (=Space)IC (=Collection) 
? Kasoukioku-~usesu-Hou nlyorl, Dalyouryou-Deitasetto 
eno Kourltsu no Yol Nyushutsuryoku ga Kanou nl Naru. 
~ Analysls 
~ 4)' 
J i 
\] II i l  oon I 
,Ival.o r ??IUf7 
~itasetto I I T  J 
". . . . . . .  ~ /~ A 5)" 
Naru (-Become)-type CDD 
Transformation 
> 
" The virtual storage access method enables the efficient 
input-output processing to a large capacity data set. 
~ Generatlon 
4) 
I enable I 
access method processing 
/ 3) \ 5) 
Suru (=Make)-type CDD 
Figure 5 Difference between Japanese and English Grasped Through CDD 
165 
(IA) A sub-language approach will not fetter the 
users, if a Japanese-Engllsh translation system 
is used as an English sentence composing aid for 
Japanese people. 
V CONCLUSION 
We have found that there are some proper 
approaches to the treatment of syntax and 
semantics from the viewpoint of machine 
translation. Our conclusions are as follows: 
(i) In order to construct a practical 
English-Japanese machine translation system, it 
is advantageous to take the syntax directed 
approach, in which a syntactic role system plays 
a central role, together with phrase structure 
type internal representation (which we call HPM). 
(2) In English-Japanese machine translation, 
syntax should be treated in a heuristic manner 
based on actual human translation methods. 
Semantics plays an assistant role in 
disambiguating the dependency among phrases. 
(3) In English-Japanese machine translation, an 
output Japanese sentence can be obtained directly 
from the internal phrase structure representation 
(HPM) which is essentially a structured set of 
syntactic roles. Output sentences from the above 
are, of course, a kind of literal translation of 
stilted style, but no doubt they are 
understandable enough for practical use. 
(4) In order to construct a practical 
Japanese-English machine translation system, it 
is advantageous to take the approach in which 
semantics plays a central role together with 
conceptual dependency type internal 
representation (which we call CDD). 
(5) In Japanese-English machine translation, 
augmented case markers play a powerful semantic 
ro le. 
(6) In Japanese-English machine translation, the 
essential part of language transformation between 
Japanese and English can be performed in terms of 
changing dependency diagrams (CDD) which involves 
predicate replacements. 
One further problem concerns establishing a 
practical method of compensating a machine 
translation system for its mistakes or 
limitations caused by the intractable 
complexities inherent to natural languages. This 
problem may be solved through the concept of 
sublanguage, pre-editing and post-editing to 
modify source/target languages. The sub-Japanese 
language approach in particular seems to be 
effective for Japanese-English machine 
translaton. One of our current interests is in a 
proper treatment of syntax and semantics in the 
sublanguage approach. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Prof. M. Nagao of Kyoto 
University and Prof. H. Tanaka of Tokyo Institute 
of Technology, for their kind and stimulative 
discussion on various aspects of machine 
translation. Thanks are also due to Dr. J. 
Kawasaki, Dr. T. Mitsumaki and Dr. S. Mitsumori 
of 5DL Hitachi Ltd. for their constant 
encouragement to this work, and Mr. F. Yamano and 
Mr. A. Hirai for their enthusiastic assistance in 
programming. 
REFERENCES 
\[i\] Chomsky, N., Aspects of the Theory of Syntax 
(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1965). 
\[2\] Dowty, D.R. et. al., 