 
A consultant system's main task is to provided helpful advice 
to the user. Consultant systems hould not only find solutions 
to user problems, but should also inform the user of potential 
problems with these solutions. Expressing such potential 
caveats is a difficult process due to the many potential plan 
failures for each particular plan in a particular planning situa- 
tion. A commonsense planner, called KIP, Knowledge Inten- 
sive Planner, is described. KIP is the planner for the UNIX 
Consultant system. KIP detect potential plan failures using a 
new knowledge structure termed a concern. Concerns allow 
KIP to detects plan failures due to unsatisfied conditions or 
goal conflict. KIP's concern algorithm also is able to provide 
information to the expression mechanism regarding potential 
plan failures. Concern information ispassed to the expression 
mechanism when KIP's selected plan might not work. In this 
case, KIP passes information regarding both the suggested 
plan and the potential caveats in that plan to the expression 
mechanism. This is an efficient approach since KIP must 
make such decisions in the context of its planning process. A 
concern's declarative structure makes it easier to express than 
procedural descriptions of plan failures used by earlier sys- 
tems. 
Marc Luria 
Computer Science Department 
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 
Halfa 
Israel 
(a2) Let me know if the door is locked. 
(a3) Be careful walking down the stairs. 
(a4) Make sure to turn off the basement light. 
In (al), the mother has provided the child with information 
about the location of his shoe. The mother has also implied 
the use of a plan: Walk down to the basement and get your 
shoes. However, there are a number of problems inherent in 
this plan. The mother might also inform her child of these 
problems. The first problem, (a2), is that one of the condi- 
tions necessary to execute the plan might be unsatisfied. The 
door to the basement might be locked. If it is locked addition- 
al steps in the plan will be necessary. The second problem, 
(a3), is that executing the walk-down-the-stairs plan might 
result in a fall. The mother knows that this outcome is likely, 
due to her experience of the child's previous attempts at the 
walk-down-the-stairs plan. The mother wishes to prevent the 
child from falling, since this is a potentially dangerous and 
frightening experience for the child. The third problem, (a4), 
is that the child might forget to turn off the light in the base- 
ment. This would threaten the mothers's goal of preventing 
the basement light from burning out. 
However, the same parent might not add: 
I. 