 
It is important to correct he errors in the results of 
speech recognition to increase the performance of a 
speech translation system. This paper proposes a 
method for correcting errors using the statistical 
features of character co-occurrence, and evaluates the 
method. 
The proposed method comprises two successive 
correcting processes. The first process uses pairs of 
strings: the first string is an erroneous substring of the 
utterance predicted by speech recognition, the second 
string is the corresponding section of the actual 
utterance. Errors are detected and corrected according 
to the database learned from erroneous-correct 
utterance pairs. The remaining errors are passed to the 
posterior process which uses a string in the corpus 
that is similar to the string including recognition 
errors. 
The results of our evaluation show that the use of 
our proposed method as a post-processor for speech 
recognition is likely to make a significant contribution 
to the performance of speech translation systems. 
method also obtains reliably recognized partial segments 
of an utterance by cooperatively using both grammatical 
and n-gram based statistical language constraints, and uses 
a robust parsing technique to apply the grammatical 
constraints described by context-free grammar (Tsukada et 
aL, 97). However, these methods do not carry out any error 
correction on a recognition result, but only specify correct 
parts in it. 
In this paper we therefore propose a method for 
correcting errors, which is characterized by learning the 
trend of errors and expressions, and by processing in an 
arbitrary length string. 
Similar work on English was presented by (E.K. 
Ringger et al, 96). Using a noisy-channel model, they 
implemented a post-processor tocorrect word-level errors 
committed by a speech recognizer. 
2 Method for Correcting Errors 
We refer to two compositions of the proposal as Error- 
Pattem-Correction (EPC) and Similar-String-Correction 
(SSC) respectively. The correction using EPC and SSC 
together inthis order is abbreviated toEPC+SSC. 
1 