
Word access is an obligatory step in language
production. In order to achieve his communica-
tive goal, a speaker/writer needs not only to
have something to say, he must also find the
corresponding word(s). Yet, knowing a word,
i.e. having it stored in a data-base or memory
(human mind or electronic device) does not im-
ply that one is able to access it in time. This
is a clearly a case where computers (electronic
dictionaries) can be of great help.
In this paper we present our ideas of how
an enhanced electronic dictionary can help peo-
ple to find the word they are looking for. The
yet-to-be-built resource is based on the age-old
notion of association: every idea, concept or
word is connected. In other words, we assume
that people have a highly connected conceptual-
lexical network in their mind. Finding a word
amounts thus to entering the network at any
point by giving the word or concept coming to
their mind (source word) and then following the
links (associations) leading to the word they are
looking for(target word).
Obviously, in order to allow for this kind
of access, the resource has to be built accord-
ingly. This requires at least two things: (a) in-
dexing words by the associations they evoke,
(b) identification and labeling of the most fre-
quent/useful associations. This is precisely our
goal. Actually, we propose to build an associa-
tive network by enriching an existing electronic
dictionary (essentially) with (syntagmatic) as-
sociations coming from a corpus, representing
the average citizen?s shared, basic knowledge of
the world (encyclopedia). Such an enhanced
electronic database resembles in many respects
our mental dictionary. Combining the power of
computers and the flexibility of the human mind
(omnidirectional navigation and quick jumps),
it emulates to some extent the latter in its ca-
pacity to navigate quickly and efficiently in a
large data base.
While the notions of association and spread-
ing activation are fairly old, their use to support
word access via computer is new. The resource
still needs to be built, and this is not a trivial
task. We discuss here some of the strategies and
problems involved in accomplishing it with the
help of people and computers (automation).
1 