 
Sentence alignment consists in estimating 
which sentence or sentences in the source 
language correspond with which sentence 
or sentences in a target language. We pre-
sent in this paper a new approach to align-
ing sentences from a parallel corpus based 
on a cross-language information retrieval 
system. This approach consists in building 
a database of sentences of the target text 
and considering each sentence of the 
source text as a "query" to that database. 
The cross-language information retrieval 
system is a weighted Boolean search en-
gine based on a deep linguistic analysis of 
the query and the documents to be indexed. 
This system is composed of a multilingual 
linguistic analyzer, a statistical analyzer, a 
reformulator, a comparator and a search 
engine. The multilingual linguistic analyzer 
includes a morphological analyzer, a part-
of-speech tagger and a syntactic analyzer. 
The linguistic analyzer processes both 
documents to be indexed and queries to 
produce a set of normalized lemmas, a set 
of named entities and a set of nominal 
compounds with their morpho-syntactic 
tags. The statistical analyzer computes for 
documents to be indexed concept weights 
based on concept database frequencies. The 
comparator computes intersections between 
queries and documents and provides a rele-
vance weight for each intersection. Before 
this comparison, the reformulator expands 
queries during the search. The expansion is 
used to infer from the original query words 
other words expressing the same concepts. 
The search engine retrieves the ranked, 
relevant documents from the indexes ac-
cording to the corresponding reformulated 
query and then merges the results obtained 
for each language, taking into account the 
original words of the query and their 
weights in order to score the documents. 
The sentence aligner has been evaluated on 
the MD corpus of the ARCADE II project 
which is composed of news articles from 
the French newspaper "Le Monde Diplo-
matique". The part of the corpus used in 
evaluation consists of the same subset of 
sentences in Arabic and French. Arabic 
sentences are aligned to their French coun-
terparts. Results showed that alignment has 
correct precision and recall even when the 
corpus is not completely parallel (changes 
in sentence order or missing sentences). 
1 