 
Recent work identifies two properties that 
appear particularly relevant to the charac-
terization of graph-based dependency mod-
els of syntactic structure1: the absence of 
interleaving substructures (well-nestedness) 
and a bound on a type of discontinuity 
(gap-degree ? 1) successfully describe 
more than 99% of the structures in two de-
pendency treebanks (Kuhlmann and Nivre 
2006).2 Bodirsky et al (2005) establish that 
every dependency structure with these two 
properties can be recast as a lexicalized 
Tree Adjoining Grammar (LTAG) deriva-
tion and vice versa. However, multi-
component extensions of TAG (MC-TAG), 
argued to be necessary on linguistic 
grounds, induce dependency structures that 
do not conform to these two properties 
(Kuhlmann and M?hl 2006). In this paper, 
we observe that several types of MC-TAG 
as used for linguistic analysis are more re-
strictive than the formal system is in prin-
ciple. In particular, tree-local MC-TAG, 
tree-local MC-TAG with flexible composi-
                                                 
1 Whereas weak equivalence of grammar classes is only con-
cerned with string sets and fails to shed light on equivalence at 
the structural level, our work involves the equivalence of deri-
vations and graph based models of dependencies.  Thus, our 
work is relevant to certain aspects of grammar engineering 
that weak equivalence does not speak to. 
2 These properties hold for many of the so-called non-
projective dependency structures and the corresponding non-
context free structures associated with TAG, further allowing 
CKY type dynamic programming approaches to parsing to 
these dependency graphs. 
tion (Kallmeyer and Joshi 2003), and spe-
cial cases of set-local TAG as used to de-
scribe certain linguistic phenomena satisfy 
the well-nested and gap degree ? 1 criteria. 
We also observe that gap degree can dis-
tinguish between prohibited and allowed 
wh-extractions in English, and report some 
preliminary work comparing the predic-
tions of the graph approach and the MC-
TAG approach to scrambling. 
1 