 
Corpus annotation plays an important 
role in linguistic analysis and computa-
tional processing of both written and 
spoken language. Syntactic annotation 
of spoken texts becomes clearly a topic 
of considerable interest nowadays, 
driven by the desire to improve auto-
matic speech recognition systems by 
incorporating syntax in the language 
models, or to build language under-
standing applications. Syntactic anno-
tation of both written and spoken texts 
in the Czech Academic Corpus was 
created thirty years ago when no other 
(even annotated) corpus of spoken texts 
has existed. We will discuss how much 
relevant and inspiring this annotation is 
to the current frameworks of spoken 
text annotation. 
1 Motivation 
The purpose of annotating corpora is to cre-
ate an objective evidence of the real usage 
of the language. In general, it is easier to anno-
tate written text ? speech must be recorded and 
transcribed to process it whilst texts are avail-
able ?immediately?; moreover, written texts 
usually obey standard grammar rules of the 
language in questions, while a true transcript of 
spoken utterances often does not. 
The theoretical linguistic research considers 
the language to be a system of layers 
(e.g. the Government and Binding theory 
(Chomsky, 1993), the Functional-Generative 
Description of the language (Sgall, Haji?ov?, 
Panevov? 1986)). In order to be a valuable 
source of linguistic knowledge, the corpus an-
notation should respect this point of view. 
The morphological and syntactic layers 
of annotation represent a standard in today?s 
text corpora, e.g. the Penn Treebank, 
the family of the Prague Dependency Tree-
banks, the Tiger corpus for German, etc. Some 
corpora contain a semantic annotation, such as 
the Penn Treebank enriched by PropBank and 
Nombank, the Prague Dependency Treebank in 
its highest layer, the Penn Chinese or the 
the Korean Treebanks. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank contains discourse annotation. 
It is desirable that syntactic (and higher) an-
notation of spoken texts respects the written-
text style as much as possible, for obvious rea-
sons: data ?compatibility?, reuse of tools etc. 
A number of questions arise immediately: 
How much experience and knowledge ac-
quired during the written text annotation can 
we apply to the spoken texts? Are the annota-
tion instructions applicable to transcriptions in 
a straightforward way or some modifications 
of them must be done? Can transcriptions be 
annotated ?as they are? or some transformation 
of their inner structure into a written text struc-
ture must precede the annotation? The Czech 
Academic Corpus will help us to find out the 
answers. 
2 