  
This paper describes a media-independent k owl- 
edge representation scheme, or content language, for 
describing the content of communicative goals and 
actions. The language is used within an intelligent 
system for automatically generating integrated text 
and information graphics presentations about com- 
plex, quantitative information. The language is de- 
signed to satisfy four requirements: to represent in- 
formation about complex quantitative r lations and 
aggregate properties; compositionality; o represent 
certain pragmatic distinctions needed for satisfying 
communicative goals; and to be usable as input by 
the media-specific generators in our system. 
1 Int roduct ion 
This paper describes a media-independent 
knowledge representation scheme, or content 
language, for describing the content of commu- 
nicative goals and actions. The language is 
used within an intelligent system for automati- 
cally generating integrated text and information 
graphics 1 presentations about complex, quanti- 
tative information. The goal of the current im- 
plementation of the system is to produce analy- 
ses and summarizations of the quantitative data 
output by a transportation scheduling program. 
In our approach \[Kerpedjiev etal.1997a, 
Kerpedjiev et al1997b, Green et a1.1998, 
This work was supported by DARPA contract num- 
ber DAA-1593K0005. 
le.g., charts, tables, maps, rather than pictorial forms 
of representation. 
69 
Kerpedjiev et ai.1998\], the content and orga- 
nization of a presentation is first planned at 
a media-independent level using a hierarchical 
planner \[Young1994\]. In this way, a high-level 
presentation goal, such as to assist the user to 
evaluate a transportation schedule created by 
the scheduling program, is ultimately decom- 
posed into media-independent subgoals, whose 
content is represented in the content language. 
The content language also is used to represent 
the content of the media-independent commu- 
nicative acts, e.g., Assert and Recommend, se- 
lected by the planner to satisfy these subgoals. 2 
Content language expressions are constructed 
by the plan constraint functions of the presen- 
tation plan operators during planning. 
The content language in the presentation 
plan is used by the system's two media-specific 
generators, one for text and one for information 
graphics. A media allocation component de- 
cides which parts of the plan shall be realized by 
each generator. The text generator transforms 
its assigned parts to sentence specifications, 
for realization by a general-purpose ntence 
generator (SURGE) \[Elhadad and Robin1996\]. 
The graphics generator transforms its assigned 
parts of the plan to a sequence of user tasks 
which a graphic must support in order to sat- 
isfy the presentation goals. The tasks are 
then input to a graphic design system (SAGE) 
2In other words, the content language describes that 
which is to be asserted, recommended, believed, etc., 
rather than the types of communicative acts to be per- 
formed or propositional ttitudes which the acts are in- 
tended to achieve. 
\[Roth and Mattis1990, Roth et a1.1994\] which 
automatically designs and realizes a graphic 
supporting the tasks. 
One of the requirements for our content lan- 
guage is the ability to represent complex de- 
scriptions of quantitative database attributes, 
such as total port capacity of all ports and 
90~ of the total weight of the cargo arriving 
by clay 25. In addition to application-specific 
concepts such as port capacity, such descrip- 
tions involve the specification of application- 
independent quantitative relations (e.g., 90~ of 
...), aggregate properties of sets (e.g., total ... 
of all ... ), and time-dependent relations (e.g., 
increase from ... to ... during the interval ...). 
Thus, we would like for the language to be able 
to express a wide range of quantitative and tem- 
poral relations and aggregate properties, rather 
than just those required for the current domain 
of transportation scheduling. 
Another requirement is for the content lan- 
guage to represent these descriptions composi- 
tionally. A compositional representation should 
facilitate the work of the text and graphics gen- 
erators, as well as media coordination. 
A third requirement for the content lan- 
guage is the ability to represent subtle differ- 
ences in communicative intention with respect 
to the same data. To give an example in the 
domain which will be used for illustration in 
the rest of the paper, the same data 3 could un- 
derly either the assertion that Three newspapers 
that are circulated in Pittsburgh carry only na- 
tional news or the assertion that Three news- 
papers that carry only national news are circu- 
lated in Pittsburgh. However, while conveying 
the same facts about the three newspapers, the 
two assertions are not interchangeable. The first 
assertion would be more effective than the sec- 
ond in an argument such as 
Be careful which newspaper you read to 
find out what is going on locally. The 
3All data used in the paper is fictitious. However, 
many of the examples were inspired by a naturally oc- 
curing example about he numbers of readers of newspa- 
pers read in Pittsburgh. We have selected this domain 
for illustration because it requires minimal background 
knowledge. 
70 
Post-Gazette covers both national and 
local news, but three newspapers that 
are circulated in Pittsburgh carry only 
national news. 
while the second would be more effective than 
the first in 
Pittsburghers are interested in national 
affairs. In fact, three newspapers that 
carry only national news are circulated 
in Pittsburgh. 
As will be shown later in the paper, the con- 
tent language nables related assertions such as 
these to be differentiated. 
A final requirement is for the representa- 
tion scheme to be media-independent i  order 
to provide a common input language for the 
media-specific generators. We assume that such 
a common language will facilitate the difficult 
problem of media coordination. On the other 
hand, the language must satisfy the needs of 
both the text and information graphics genera- 
tors. 
In the rest of the paper, first we describe 
the content language, focusing on aspects of the 
content language which are applicable to other 
domains. Next, we illustrate how subtle varia- 
tions in communicative intention can be repre- 
sented in the content language, and give exam- 
ples of how they can be expressed in text and 
information graphics. Finally, we describe some 
related work. 
2 Content Language 
In order to ensure that the language would be 
applicable to a variety of quantitative domains, 
we first performed a corpus analysis, the results 
of which are summarized in the next section. 
Then we describe the syntax we adopted to sat- 
isfy the requirements given in the introduction. 
2.1 Corpus  Ana lys i s  
We have collected samples of presentations with 
integrated natural anguage and graphics in or- 
der to describe and analyze the vocabulary and 
structure of such presentations. To ensure gen- 
erality, the corpus includes presentations from 
different disciplines (Economics and Medicine) 
and intended for different audiences. 4 It also 
includes samples from collections of presenta- 
tions compiled by others, such as \[Tufte1983, 
Tufte1990, Tufte1997, Kosslyn1994\], and pre- 
scriptive examples found in books on how 
to design effective presentations \[Zelazny1996, 
Kosslyn1994\]. 
The analysis of this corpus contributed i- 
rectly to the development of a vocabulary for 
the content language. To describe the content of 
the presentations in the corpus, we distinguish 
three different sets of predicates with associated 
modifiers, as follows: 5
? Comparison Predicates: \[much\] Greater, 
Lower I Highest, Lowest I \[very\] Far-from, 
Close-to I \[almost I exactly \] Equal, n- 
Times.Comparison Predicates apply to any 
quantitative attribute of individuals or sets, 
e.g., On this measure Central Europe's stock- 
markets are still puny compared with those of 
fast-growing Asian countries. 
? Global Predicates: \[widelylslightly\] Vary 
\[:from :to\], Constant. 
Global Predicates apply to quantitative at- 
tributes of sets, e.g., Sales representative p r- 
formance is uneven. 
? Trend Predicates: Remain-constant I \[con- 
siderably I slightly\] Increase, Decrease \[:from 
:to\] I Drop, Fall, Rise \[:from :to\] I Reach-a- 
Plateau I Fluctuate, 
Trend Predicates apply only to time series (a 
set of data ordered chronologically), e.g., Pro- 
duction of television sets in Russia fell from 
4.5m units in 1991 to fewer than lm in 1995. 
2.2 Syntax  
The first three requirements described in the In- 
troduction (representing quantitative and tem- 
poral relations and aggregate properties, com- 
4Economics: The Economist (March-August 1996). 
Medicine: UC Berkeley Wellness Letter (June 1993 and 
September 1996), Scientific American (September 1996), 
New England Journal o\] Medicine (April-August 1996). 
5Square brackets indicate optionality, the bar 
exclusive-or, and commas separate variants with differ- 
ing orientations. 
71 
positionality, and representing certain prag- 
matic distinctions) led us to make use of a first- 
order logic with restricted quantification (RQ- 
FOL), which has been used for representing 
the meaning of natural anguage queries involv- 
ing complex referring expressions \[Woods1983, 
Webber1983\]. The features of RQFOL most 
useful for our purposes are (i) that it permits 
pragmatic distinctions to be made among ex- 
pressions which are semantically equivalent, and 
(ii) that it supports the compositional specifica- 
tion of complex descriptions of discourse ntities 
\[Webber1983\]. 
A pragmatic distinction supported in RQ- 
FOL and our content language is the distinc- 
tion between the main predication of an expres- 
sion and information to be conveyed about the 
objects of the main predication. For example, 
although (la) and (lb) are semantically equiv- 
alent with (lc), they are not interchangeable in 
their effectiveness for achieving different com- 
municative intentions (as was demonstrated in 
the 