 
Large phonetic orpora including both standard and variant ranscriptions are available for many 
languages. However, applications requiring the use of dynamic vocabularies make necessary to 
transcribe words not present in the dictionary. Also, additional alternative pronunciations to
standard forms have shown to improve recognition accuracy. Therefore, new techniques to 
automatically generate variants in pronunciations have been investigated and proven to be very 
effective. However, rule-based systems till remain useful to generate standard transcriptions ot 
previously available or to build new corpora, oriented chiefly to synthesis applications. 
The present paper describes a letter-to-phone conversion system for Spanish designed to supply 
transcriptions to the flexible vocabulary speech recogniser and to the synthesiser, both developed 
at CSELT (Centro Studi e Laboratori relecomunicazioni), Turin, Italy. Different sets of rules are 
designed for the two applications. Symbols inventories also differ, although the IPA alphabet is the 
reference system for both. Rules have been written in ANSI C and implemented on DOS and 
Windows 95 and can be selectively applied. Two speech corpora have been transcribed by means 
of these grapheme-to-phoneme conversion rules: a) the SpeechDat Spanish corpus which includes 
4444 words extracted from the phonetically balanced sentences of the database b) a corpus 
designed to train an automatic aligner to segment units for synthesis, composed of 303 sentences 
(3240 words) and 338 isolated words; rule-based transcriptions of this corpus were manually 
corrected. 
The phonetic forms obtained by the rules matched satisfactorily the reference transcriptions: most 
mistakes on the first corpus were caused by the presence of secondary stresses in the SpeechDat 
transcriptions, which were not assigned by the rules, whereas errors on the synthesis corpus 
appeared mostly on hiatuses and on words of foreign origin. 
Further developments oriented to recognition can imply addition of rules to account for Latin 
American pronunciations (especially Mexican, Argentinian and Paraguayan); for synthesis, on the 
other hand, rules to represent coarticulatory phenomena atword boundaries can be implemented, 
in order to transcribe whole sentences. 
33 
