 
Loanword phonology seeks to model the 
process by which foreign words are 'nativised' 
or incorporated into the phonological system 
of the 'borrowing' language. We can conceive 
of this as a parsing of the phonetic input 
provided by the foreign word forms, in 
accordance with phonological output 
constraints of the borrowing language. 
Following Silverman (1992) we conceive 
loanword formation as fundamentally a two- 
stage process: the first of which yields a 
parsing of the phonetic input into segmentally 
organised phonetic feature bundles, 
interpretable as segmental targets in the 
borrowing language. In the second stage of 
processing, these segmental targets are parsed 
into phonological structures ( yllables, mora, 
feet...etc) compatible with the word-prosody 
of the borrowing language. 
Japanese borrowings from English provide a 
good test-bed for models of loanword 
formation, because examples are abundant 
and, while the segmental mapping from 
English to Japanese is relatively 
straightforward, their respective word-level 
prosodies are strikingly different, providing 
ample opportunity to observe prosodic re- 
structuring in loanword formation. 
to construct 'symbolic' or 'analytical' parsing 
algorithms for this task, either with or without 
reference to a framework of learnability 
theory. This approach came under strong 
challenge from 'empirical' Connectionist 
models of language processing in the 1980's. 
The debate between these competing 
paradigms, or the search for some suitable 
'hybrid', continues. It may be argued that 
loanword formation provides a more 
restrictive, and hence better controlled, 
environment for studying parsing mechanisms 
than other natural language processing tasks, 
which involve a host of lexical, 
morphological, syntactic or pragmatic 
influences. 
In this paper, we report he results obtained 
from a feed-forward neural network, trained 
on an 1100 word corpus of American English 
loanwords "borrowed' into Japanese, post- 
WWII. We make preliminary comparisons 
with an analytical constraint-based approach 
to modeling loanword formation. 
An intended application for the NN parser, 
was to devise an English-Japanese proper or 
place-name translator, which would map an 
English phoneme sequence into Katakana 
(e.g.: Brisbane/brIzbOn/=> 7" ,J z" ~," :, ). 
The theoretical aim of this study is to 
investigate he learning mechanisms required 
for phonological parsing in loanword 
formation. Phonologists have typically sought 
