ing away from the particular epresenta- 
tional means that have been discussed here, con- 
stituency and dependency, I now want to point to 
another way of looking at syntagmatic relations that 
is not a priori committed to a strict notion of de- 
pendency or a traditional notion of phrase structure 
and is therefore unlikely to encounter the problems 
dicussed ill the preceding section. This is Systemic 
43 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Functional Grammar (SFG; (Hallida), 1973; Halli- 
day, 1985)) which is known in computational lin- 
guistics foremostl.v by application ill Natural Lan- 
guage Generation (NLG) (e.g., (Matthiessen and 
Bateman, 1991; Fawcett and Tucker, 1989; Bate- 
man et al, 1991; Teich and Bateman, 1994)). The 
representational aspect of SFC, that is most promi- 
nent is the system network. System networks are 
descriptions of paradignlatic ga'ammatical relations 
intended as declarative statements of grammatical 
features and the coocurrence constraints between 
them. System networks are like the type hierar- 
chies used in HPS(J ill this regard (cf. also (Bateman, 
1991: Bateman et al, 1992; Henschel, 1995; Teich, in 
press)): the grammatical types in SI:G, however, are 
functionally rather than surface-syntactically moti- 
vated. Also. constraints on syntactic structure are 
tied to grammatical t.vpes, so that one could speak 
of a 'grammaticized" grammar~as opposed to lexi- 
calized grammars. Ill SFG, it is not lexical, but gram- 
marital classes that exhibit constraints on syntactic 
structure. 
Because syntactic structure is one of the less 
prominent opics in NLG and because SF6 is pri- 
marily a classification-based approach to gramnmr. 
SFG's representation f syntagmatic structure is less 
known. 
SFG maintains that there are four different kinds 
of syntagmatic patterning (Halliday, 1979). 
P rosod ic  s t ructure .  Agreement is a syntag- 
matic phenomenon that is ptvsodic in nature, in the 
sense that a particular ealizational effect spreads 
over more than one constituent, similar to prosodic 
features that are strung throughout an intonational 
unit (see Figure 5 displaying Subject-Finite agree- 
lnellt). 
Mood 
Subject3,.,}.~:~ Finite3,.a.,~ 
Site left ... 
Figure 5: Prosodic aspect of syntagmatic structure 
Per iod ic  s t ructure .  Information structure be- 
longs to a class of structure that is said to be pe- 
riodic. It reflects one of the points of prvminence 
we find ill clauses: informational prominence, which 
shows ill the distribution of Given and New, where 
in spoken mode. the intonation focus, which falls 
into the New part of the utterance, marks the in- 
formational pronfinence by carrying the major pitch 
change. Another point of prominence is thematic 
prominence: the structuring of a clause in theme 
and rheme (see Figure 6). 
In terdependency  structure.  Coordinate 
structures belong to a class of structure called in- 
Given New 
Theme Rheme 
She left the possum on the deck 
Figa\]re 6: Periodic aspect of syntagmatic structure 
te~rlependency structure. Coordinate structures are 
paratactic structures and are opposed to hypotac- 
tic, i.e., subordinate, structures. While a depen- 
dency representation can handle the latter because 
there is an identifiable head element, there is no 
head element in paratactic structures: its elements 
are rather mutually dependent. The term interde- 
pendency is used to cover both hypotactically and 
paratactically related syntactic units, s For an ex- 
ample see Figure 7. 
(1) Paratactic structure: 
1 2 
(Extended) (Coordinator) (Extension) 
Lucy stood inside and Fred waited 
(2) Hypotactic structure: 
(Euhanced) (Enhancement) .. 
He might have come if you had called him 
Figure 7: Interdependency aspect of syntagmatic 
structure 
Ill SFG, the notation for the elements of paratactic 
structures is 1, 2, etc. and for those of hypotactic 
stuctures it is ta, 8, ~" etc. Paratactic structures are 
said not to have heads, whereas in hypotactic struc- 
tures, n is considered the head. The additional label- 
ing (Extender, Extension, Enhanced, Enhancement) 
marks the semantic-rhetorical relation between the 
dements of the structure: In (1) in Figure 7 the 1 
element is said to be extended (by the 2 element); 
ill (2), tile a element is said to be enhanced by the 
'3 element. 
Const i tuency  st ructure.  The fourth kind of 
syntagmatic patterning SF6 finds is one that has 
unique elements uch as Subject, Object, Predi- 
cate or Actor, Goal, Process. 4 Here, constituency 
is considered an appropriate means of representa- 
tion. The categorial values (S, NP, PP etc) are sim- 
ply attributes associated with these functional con- 
stituents. See Figure 8 for an example. 
3See (Hjelmslev, 1961) for a similar distinction in the de- 
termination and interdependence subtypes of dependency. 
4This is similar to LFG'S f-structures. 
I 44 
I 
Subject,vp Finitev ObjectN/, Adjunct/,/, 
Actor Process Goal Location 
She on the deck teft the possum 
Figure 8: Constituency aspect of syntagrnatic struc- 
ture 
A unif ied view: the  funct ion s t ructure .  A 
representation f syntagmatic structure in SFG com- 
prises all of these aspects. The distinction of syn- 
tagmatic patterning into these four aspects stems 
from the conception of fimction in SFG. The func- 
tional nmtivation of categories in the system net- 
work, i.e., tile granunatical type hierarchy, is four- 
fold: paradigmatic gramnmtical types are exper/- 
entially, logically, interpersonally or textually moti- 
vated. Each of these describes the grammar of a 
language from a different angle and goes together 
with a particular mode of expression in syntag- 
matic structure. The experiential aspect of syntag- 
matic structuring is elemental, reflecting part-whole 
relations--tiffs aspect can be suitably represented by 
constituency: the logical aspect can be represented 
by a special kind of dependency structure, the in- 
terdependency structure, which represents part-part 
relations; the interpersonal nd tile textual aspects, 
however, prosodic and periodic structure, are diffi- 
cult to press into these schemes because they can 
cut across constituency boundaries or nmy contra- 
dict constituency groupings. Therefore, if all of 
these aspects of syntagmatic patterning are to be 
uniformly described in one representation, the cola- 
stituency representation part should be as little com- 
mitted to a particular kind of grouping as possible. 
so as to avoid conflicts with other groupings as re- 
quired for instance by information distribution. In 
fact, the kind of constituency SFG subscribes to is 
a nmltiple-branching structure, where the nodes are 
functionally annotated, reflecting a minimal brack- 
eting strategy (see below). 
A syntagmatic representation at clause level of 
Fred ate the beans, for example, where in terms of 
infornmtion structure Fred is Given would look as 
follows: '~ 
Actor 
Theme 
Given 
Subject 
Fred 
Process I Goal 
Rheme 
New 
Finite \ [Object  
ate the beans 
Sin a feature structure notation (here: including informa- 
tion about categorial and lexical realization) this is: 
\[ac$or: II\[NP \[lex: Frcd\]\], subject: 81, theme: 
goal:  12\[NP \[ lex:  bean~\] ,  object: $2, 
process: $3\[V \ [ lex:  ate\]\], f in i te :  #3, 
theme: <#2,#3>, 
hey: <#2,#3>\] 
Ill, 
And for the interpretation with Fred ate as Given, 
'Given' can be conflated with both Actor and Pro- 
cess (Subject and Finite): 
Actor Process Goal 
Theme Rheme 
Given New 
Subject Finite Object 
Fred ate the beans 
Here. a constituent is codescribed from several 
perspectives, taking into account the different as- 
pects of syntagmatic patterning sketched above, 
each creating a separate "layer" in the representa- 
tion. or in other words, each coming with a particu- 
lar set of attributes, like Theme and Rheme/Given 
anti New for the textual mode, Actor, Process, Goal 
for the experiential mode and Subject, Finite, Ob- 
ject for the interpersonal modefi 
A function structure like this implies a very fiat 
constituency, where the constituent boundaries do 
not necessarily match one-to-one. Thus, both of the 
interpretations of information distribution of Fred 
ate the beans are compatible with the rest of the 
st ructure .  
The representation f coordinate structure in SFG 
benefits imilarly from the minimal bracketing strat- 
egy: The coordinating conjunction itself is an im- 
mediate constituent of a coordinate structure, e.g., 
for red apples and green plums, the function struc- 
ture implies a bracketing as (red apples)  (and) 
(green plums) : 
1 2 
Extended Coordinator Extension 
Ted apples and green plums 
Here, none of the elements has to be attributed 
head status and the conjunction itself is a con- 
stituent. 
In terms of agreement interpreted as prosodic 
structure, the HPSG representation f agreement in 
the German nominal group by structure sharing is 
actually a possible realization of this view. However, 
with the current representational means employed in 
computational implementations of SFC, such as the 
NIGEL grammar in KPML (Bateman, 1997), such a 
formulation is not readily possible. This has two 
reasons, one being of a theoretical nature, the other 
one being a matter of computational representation. 
The theoretical problem is that features in the gram- 
marital system network have to be unique and fea- 
ture sharing among constituents i thus not allowed. 
As a consequence, there is no mechanism in the 
~There are no logical attributes here, because logical struc- 
turing only pertains to complex syntactic units, such as parat- 
actic and hypotactic structures. 
45 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
KPML implementation for feature sharing. In uni- 
fication and constraint-based feature structure rep- 
resentations of NIGEL (Kasper, 1987; Henschel, 1994: 
Henschel, 1995) , feature sharing is possible, but still 
the feature uniqueness postulate would have to be 
relaxed in order to nmke use of this mechanism. 
5 Conc lus ions  
In this paper I have tried to raise the often discussed 
question of constituency vs. dependent" for syn- 
tactic representation to a more general level asking 
whether constituency and dependency are sufficient 
at all for the representation f syntagmatic relations. 
After reviewing some of the main issues in the dis- 
cussion 'constituency vs. dependency', I have pre- 
sented some kinds of syntagmatic patternings that 
can be problematic for det)endency/constituency 
representations: coordinate structure, infornmtion 
structure and syntactit" aga'eement: also, I have given 
further evidence of these obserx~ltions by presenting 
examples of granlular models that do work for some 
of the problems discussed, if a more unconventional 
approach is l)ursued, such as e.g., COG for informa- 
tion strcture. 
I have then questioned the primacy of con- 
stituency and del)endenc.v for the representation f 
syntactic structure and sketched the more diver- 
sifted, fimctionally-based view of Systemic Func- 
tional Grammar. in which only minimal constituent 
grotlpillgs are used and Solne of the represeuta- 
tional l~rol)lems encountered with true del)endency 
apl)ronches ~llld traditional constituency approaches 
do not arise. 
There are two caveats in place here, one concern- 
ing the .~F(; approach to syntagmatic structure itself. 
the other one conceruing SFG'S computational ppli- 
cation more generally. 
The st-c; view of syntagmatic structure inextri- 
cably goes together with a classification-based ap- 
proach to grammar in which grammatical classes 
arc fimctionally motivated. The kernel of an SI:G is 
the grammatical classification hierarchy, represent- 
ing the paradigmatic relations that characterize the 
gramnmr of a language. It is important o note 
that the SFG approach to the representation f syn- 
tagmatic structure by itself is therefore not a full 
model of grammar--just like itPSG would not be a 
full nmdel of ga'ammar without its hierarchy of lex- 
ical and phrasal types. However, the insight that 
SFG has to offer is the acknowledgment of the di- 
versity of syntagmatic patterning and pointing to 
the limits of the l)art-whole (constituency) and part- 
part (depeudency) representations comnmnly em- 
ployed in syntactic modeling. Recent developments 
in constraint-based fornmlations of SFG (Henschel, 
1994: Henschel, 1995) may introduce new methods 
of representation to SFG (sudl as feature or structure 
46 
sharing; cf. Section 4). However, the typed feature 
structures Henschel has experimented with all show 
particular weaknesses when faced with large classifi- 
cation hierarchies, as they are commonly employed 
in implementations of Systemic Functional Gram- 
nmr, such as the KPML system. 
The second caveat concerns the computational 
processing of sFc's in Natural Language Under- 
standing. SF6 is widely used in Natural Language 
Generation and has inspired a number of generation 
grmnmars. However, sr'c is hardly used in parsing. 
For NL generation, the major attraction of SFC lies 
in the centrality of functional grammatical c assifica- 
tion, whid~ draws distinctions that are relevant for 
generation, sFc's flat structures work fine for gen- 
eration, where the functional labeling and the an- 
notation with interpersonal nd textual information 
is andmred in the functional, paradigmatic descrip- 
tion. i.e.. the grammatical system network. The few 
attempts that have been made in parsing with SFG: 
notably (Kasper, 1988). have shown that SFG func- 
tional structures are just not informative nough. 
Kasper had to add a set of phrase structure rules, 
so that possible patterns for each major constituent 
category could be more easily recognized. The suit- 
ability of a model of syntactic structure for computa- 
tiomd application can thus also depend on the kind 
of computational pplication--NL understanding or
NL generation. 
Acknowledgments 
The author would like to thank Erich Steiner and 
the reviewers of this paper for comments and sug- 
gestions for improvements. 
Re ferences  
John M. Anderson. 1971. Dependency and gram- 
matical functions. Foundations o\] Language, 
7:30-37. 
John A. Bateman, Elisabeth A. Maier, Elke Te- 
ich. and Leo Wanner. 1991. Towards an archi- 
wcture for situated text generation. In Interna- 
tion.al Conference on Current Issues in Computa- 
tional Linguistics, Penang, Malaysia. Also a~Tlil- 
able as technical report of GMD/Institut Ftir In- 
tegrierte Publikations- und Informationssysteme, 
Darmstadt, Germany. 
John A. Bateman, Martin Emele, and Stefan 
Momma. 1992. The nondirectional representation 
of Systemic Functional Grammars and Semantics 
as Typed Feature Structures. In Proceedings of 
COLING-92, Nantes, France, July. 
John A. Bateman. 1991. Language as con- 
straint and language as resource: a com'er- 
gence of metaphors in systemic-functional gram- 
mar. Technical report, Gesellschaft fftir Mathe- 
matik und Datenverarbeitung - Institut fiir In- 
= 
t 
: 
tegrierte Publikations- und Informationssysteme, 
Darmstadt, Germany. Written version of pa- 
per l)resented at the International Workshop on 
Constraint-based Formalisms for Natural Lan- 
guage Generation, November 27-30, 1990, Bad 
Teinach. 
John A. Bateman, 1997. KPML Development Envi- 
ronment: multilingual linguistic resource develop- 
meat and sentence gevcration. German National 
Center for hffornmtion Technology (GMD), Insti- 
tute for Integrated Publication and Information 
Systems (IPSI), Darmstadt. Germany, March. 
(Release 1.0). 
Klaus Baumg/irtner. 1970. Konstituenz und De- 
pendenz. Zur Integration tier beiden Prinzipien. 
In Steger H., editor, Vorschl@e f~r eine struktu- 
rale Gramamtik des Deutschen, pages 52-77. Wis- 
sensdmftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt. 
Noam Chomsky 1970. Remarks on nominalization. 
In R. 3acobs and P.S. Rosenbaum, editors, Read- 
ings in Evglish Transformational Grammar. Ginn 
and Co.. V~sdtham..Massachusetts. 
Robin P. Fawcett and Gordon H. Tucker. 1989. 
Prot,type generators 1 and 2. Technical Report 
COMMUNAL Report Number 10, Computational 
Linguistics Unit, University of Wales College of 
Cardift. 
Norman M. Fraser and Richard A. Hudson. 1992. 
Inheritance in Word Grammar. Computational 
Linguistics, 18(2). 
H. Gaifinan. 1965. Dependency systems and phrase 
structure systems, lnfo~Tnation and Control, 
8:304-337. 
Michael A.K. Hallida.v. 1973. Explorations in the 
Functions of Language. Edward Arnold. London. 
.Michael A.K. Halliday. 1979. Modes of meaning 
and modes of saying: types of grammatical struc- 
ture and their determination by different seman- 
tic functions. In In D.J. Allerton, E. Carney. 
and D. Holdcroft, editors. Function and Context 
in Linguistic Analysis. Essays offered to William 
Haas. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Michael A.K. Halliday. 1985. An 